---
layout: sermon
title: John 1:19-28
date: 2024-09-15T14:30:32.000Z
category: sermon
audio_url: https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/91779713/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-8-16%2Fe84ebb24-5c9a-2447-ce2c-e9ffa407cf7b.m4a
duration: 34:18
scripture: John 1:19-28
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: "Who is John the Baptist & why is he important?"
guid: 85af2b25-22c0-4f49-8ac3-0bd47ec291ee
episode_id: 8e902fab
---

## Transcription

We're just gonna read John, all of John chapter, we're gonna read all of John this morning.

I already tried that, didn't get too far.

We're gonna read just John chapter 1, and then we will focus our time in verses 19 through 28.

I really wanted to get through all of this John the Baptist stuff in one week, but there's just a lot here.

We'll get a little bit more of John the Baptist next week, but this week, let's start by reading John chapter 1.

Somebody wants to read it?

I'll do it.

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

In the beginning with God, all things were made through Him, and without Him was not anything made that was made.

In Him was life, and the life was the light of men.

The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it.

There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.

He came as a witness to bear witness about the light that all might believe through Him.

He was not the light that came to bear witness about the light.

The true light, which gives light to everyone, was coming into the world.

He was in the world, and the world was made through Him, yet the world did not know Him.

He came to His own, and His own people did not receive Him.

But to all who did receive Him, who believed in His name, He gave the right to become children of God, who were born not of blood, nor the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

Then the word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we have seen His glory, Gloria as of the only Son, from the Father, full of grace and truth.

John bore witness about Him, and cried out, This was He of whom I said, He who comes after me ranks before me, because He was before me.

For from His fullness we have all received grace upon grace.

For the law was given through Moses, grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.

No one has ever seen God, the only God who is at the Father's side.

He has made Him known.

And this is the testimony of John.

When the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask Him, Who are You?

He confessed and did not deny, but confessed, I am not the Christ.

And they asked Him, What then, are you Elijah?

He said, I am not.

Are you the prophet?

And He answered, No.

So they said to Him, Who are you?

We need to give an answer to those who sent us.

What do you say about yourself?

He said, I am the voice of the one crying in the wilderness.

Make straight the way of the Lord, as the prophet Isaiah said.

Now they had been sent from the Pharisees.

They asked Him, them are you baptizing if you are neither Christ nor Elijah nor the prophet?

John answered them, I baptize with water, but among you stands one you do not know.

Even he who comes after me, the strap of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie, these things took place in Bethany across the Jordan where John was baptizing.

The next day, he saw Jesus coming toward him and said, behold, the Lamb of God who takes away the world of sin, the sin of the world.

This is of whom I said after me comes a man who ranks before me, because he was before me.

I myself did not know him, but for this purpose, I came baptizing with water that he might be revealed to Israel.

And John bore witness, I saw the spirit descend from the heaven like a dove, and it reminded remained on him.

I myself did not know him, but he who sent me to baptize with water said to me, he on whom you see the spirit descend and remain, this is he who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.

And I have seen and have borne witness, this is the Son of God.

The next day again, John was standing with two of his disciples and looked at Jesus as he walked by and said, behold, the Lamb of God.

The two disciples heard him say this and they followed Jesus.

Jesus turned and saw them following and said to them, what are you seeking?

And they said to him, Rabbi, which was his teacher, where are you staying?

He said to them, come and you will see.

So they came and saw where he was staying and they stayed with him that day.

For it was about the 10th hour.

One of the two who heard John speak and follow Jesus was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother.

He first found his own brother, Simon, and said to him, we have found Messiah.

He brought him to Jesus.

Jesus looked at him and said, you are Simon, son of John.

He should be called Cethas.

The next day, Jesus decided to go to Galilee.

He found Philip and sent to him, follow me.

Now Philip was from Bethesda, the city of Andrew Peter.

Philip found Nathaniel and said to him, we have found him of whom Moses in the law and also the prophets wrote, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.

Nathaniel said to him, can anything good come out of Nazareth?

Philip said to him, come and see.

Jesus saw Nathaniel coming toward him and said to him, behold, in Israel I have been, in whom there is no deceit.

Nathaniel said to him, how do you know me?

Jesus answered him.

Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.

Nathaniel answered him, Rabbi, you are son of God.

You are the king of Israel.

Jesus answered him, because I said to you, I saw you under the fig tree.

Do you believe?

You will see greater things than these.

And he said to him, truly, truly I say to you, you will see heaven open and the angels of God ascending and descending on the son of man.

Awesome.

Thank you, Tim.

So this morning we're going to focus in on verses 19 through 28.

And there's a lot here.

And so let me read that real quick.

And then we will get into the rest.

And this is the testimony of John.

John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, who are you?

He confessed and did not deny but confessed, I am not the Christ.

And they asked him, what then?

Are you Elijah?

He said, I am not.

Are you the prophet?

He answered, no.

So they said to him, who are you?

We need to give an answer to those who sent us.

What do you say about yourself?

He said, I am the voice of one crying out in the wilderness, make straight the way of the Lord, as the prophet Isaiah said.

Now they had been sent from the Pharisees.

They asked him, then why are you baptizing if you are neither the Christ nor Elijah, nor the prophet?

John answered, I baptize with water, but among you stands one you do not know.

Even he who comes after me, the straps of whose sandals, I am not worthy to untie.

These things took place in Bethany across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.

So the question I want to answer today is, who is John the Baptist?

And why is he important?

Because as we've already seen in the prologue, the first 18 verses, we see mention of Jesus and then we see mention of John the Baptist.

So who is John the Baptist?

Why is he important?

Why does it matter?

John the Baptist, first of all, is the cousin of Jesus.

The angel Gabriel tells Mary in Luke chapter one, she says, your relative Elizabeth is in her old age and has also conceived a son.

And that son is the child of Zechariah and Elizabeth.

Zechariah was a priest in the temple and their son, John the Baptist, was a relative of Mary, the mother of Jesus.

We'll get to more of Luke later, but John is the cousin of Jesus.

He is also the final prophet of the Old Testament.

And you go, wait, we're reading the New Testament.

Let me explain.

And it might seem like a contradiction, especially from what we just read, right?

He has this back and forth with the religious leaders, we'll call them that.

With the Levites and priests and they ask him, right, who are you?

He confessed and did not deny, but confess, I'm not the Christ.

And they asked him, what then?

Are you Elijah?

He said, I'm not.

Are you the prophet?

No.

So he said to them, who are you?

We need to give an answer.

So first John the Baptist denies he's the Christ.

He denies he is not the Messiah.

And then they ask, are you Elijah?

And he said, no, why are they asking if he is Elijah?

Well, if we were to turn back to Malachi, which is the last book of the Old Testament and in between the Old Testament and the story of Jesus, there's 400 years of silence, Malachi was the last Old Testament prophet, sorry, Malachi was the last written book, Old Testament prophet.

And after Malachi, there's 400 years of silence where there is no prophet.

And, but Malachi says in his book, he says, behold, I will send you Elijah, the prophet before the great and awesome day of the Lord comes.

So Malachi, the prophet says that God will send Elijah.

And when God has sent Elijah, the great and awesome day of the Lord is coming.

Okay.

So the Jews of the time, back in Jesus's time, they were awaiting, well, I guess the 400 years after that prophecy are awaiting Elijah to return.

And so when the religious leaders ask, are you Elijah?

They're peaking and prodding and wondering if he's Elijah, that means that the Messiah is coming and which we have to go back to Luke.

Chapter one and read this interaction between, again, John the Baptist is the son of Zechariah, who was a priest and Elizabeth was his mother.

And we have to go back to Luke chapter one to see the interaction between Zechariah, John Baptist's dad, and the angel of the Lord, where it says Luke chapter one, verse 11, and there appeared to him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense and Zechariah, again, John Baptist's father, was troubled when he saw him and feared and fear fell upon him.

But the angel said to him, do not be afraid Zechariah for your prayer has been heard and your wife, Elizabeth will bear you a son and you shall call his name John and you will have joy and gladness and many will rejoice at his birth for he will be great before the Lord and he must not drink wine or strong drink.

And he will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb.

And he will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord, their God.

And he will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the disobedient to the wisdom and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just and make ready for the Lord, a people prepared.

So there we have the angel of the Lord.

Uh, tell John's dad, hey, your wife is pregnant and your son is going to be, is going to come in the spirit and power of Elijah to prepare the people for the Messiah.

So, uh, did John the Baptist lie to the Pharisees?

No, because he was not Elijah reincarnated.

He was not physically, uh, Elijah, but he was sent in the spirit and power of Elijah.

And Jesus then also affirms John the Baptist as this Elijah in Matthew 11, where he is speaking to John the Baptist disciples.

And, uh, Jesus said in Matthew 11, 13 and 14, for all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.

Okay.

So there, John is categorized as the final in the same category as the prophets and the law prophesied until John.

So John is the bookend there.

And if you are willing to accept it, again, these are the words of Jesus.

He is Elijah who is to come.

So we get this prophecy from, or I guess a word from the angel of the Lord, then Jesus's words saying, if you accept it, he is Elijah.

Uh, and so that makes John the Baptist, the last Old Testament prophet, uh, a great trivia question.

If you're ever in Bible trivia, or maybe you're asked to lead Bible trivia, who is the, who is the last Old Testament prophet?

People would say Malachi, but now, you know, it's John the Baptist, but there's, there's, but wait, there's more.

Um, okay.

Uh, again, verse 19 in John one, uh, who are you?

Uh, he confessed and did not deny, but confessed.

And that, that is a, obviously a very weird sentence.

Um, and it's written that way because John was trying to be very clear that he was not the Messiah.

So you get this weird, he confessed.

Did not deny, but confessed weird language, whatever.

I'm not the Christ.

And they asked him, what are you then?

Are you Elijah?

He said, I'm not.

I'm came in the spirit and power though.

Are you the prophet?

He answered no.

Uh, so they said to him, who are you?

We need to give an answer for those who sent us.

I am the voice of one crying out in the wilderness, make straight the way of the Lord, as the prophet Isaiah said.

Um, so he is not the Messiah.

He is not Elijah reincarnated.

Are you the prophet?

Uh, he responds no.

Uh, they did not ask him if he was a prophet.

They asked him if he was the prophet, which again is, uh, is another Old Testament reference, which the Israelites were of course, awaiting Elijah, as we've already discussed and uncovered, but they were also awaiting a prophet like Moses.

Where do we get this?

All the way back in Deuteronomy 18, 18, where, uh, the Lord says, I will raise up for them a prophet like you.

He's talking to Moses from among their brothers, and I will put my words in his mouth and he shall speak to them all that I command.

So Moses was not just a prophet.

Moses was also the mediator of God's people.

He stood in between God and his people.

Cough cough.

Jesus stands in between us.

He is our mediator.

Jesus is our mediator.

Moses was their mediator and, uh, physically, uh, was with God, uh, up up at Mount Sinai, of course he comes down with the 10 commandments and then what are, uh, Aaron and, and all of the Israelite people doing, they're worshiping this golden calf.

And then, uh, Moses in his rage breaks the 10 commandments, goes up to, goes back on top of the mountain to be with God and begs for the people's forgiveness.

And again, then God so graciously gives them 10 commandments, all this stuff.

Moses, the Israelites don't have water and Moses goes to God and says, what do we do?

They're grumbling and complaining.

They want water.

And then, uh, God tells Moses to strike the rock and then water comes forth.

Uh, again, uh, Moses, the Israelites are complaining, we're hungry.

Where's the food?

We're going to die in the desert.

And then Moses goes back to God.

What do we do?

And then of course, manna comes, right?

Uh, so Moses is this shadow and type of Jesus who is this person who stands in the gap between God's people and God.

And so we see in Deuteronomy 18 where God says, I'm going to send another one like you who will stand in the gap.

And of course we have the luxury of this written word and thousands of years of history to see that Jesus is this Messiah.

So when John is being questioned by the religious leaders, are you the prophet?

They're not talking about Isaiah, Jeremiah, all these other Old Testament prophets, they're asking for the prophet.

Who was the prophet?

Moses.

Um, and so when, when John the Baptist is asked, are you the prophet?

He's like, no, I'm not Moses.

And so then they ask, well, then what are you, dude?

And he says, I am the voice of one crying out in the wilderness, make straight the way of the Lord as the prophet Isaiah said.

So the religious leaders who were questioning John the Baptist, they first went to Malachi again.

They asked him if he was Elijah.

He's like, no.

Then they went to Deuteronomy.

Are you the prophet?

And John the Baptist goes, no.

And then he asks, or they ask him, then who are you?

Where do you come from?

And John quotes Isaiah, where he says, and he's quoting Isaiah chapter 40, verse three, a voice cries in the wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert, a highway for our God.

So in the context, uh, Israel is exiled and, uh, the prophet Isaiah is calling for a metaphorical improvement of the road system because one day the Israelites were to return and they, they needed more space, right?

Prepare, prepare away, make a way.

We're coming back.

We're, we're going to be back.

Prepare away, make a way.

We're coming back.

We're, we're going to return.

Uh, and so he's literally saying like, get ready because there's about to be a stampede of people returning back to our holy city.

And now we see in the context of John the Baptist, he is the voice in the, in the desert saying, prepare a way for the Lord.

There is a, there is a return.

God is returning back to, uh, the hearts of his people back to him.

So we need to prepare ourself.

And he's saying, I am the one who is, who is helping prepare.

And even going back to the prophecy that, uh, the angel tells his father, he says, uh, he will be great for before the Lord.

He must not drink wine or strong drink.

You filled the Holy spirit, even from his mother's womb.

And he will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord, their God.

And he will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah to turn the hearts of the father to the children and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just to make ready there it is again, for the Lord, a people prepared.

So his, even from his, before he was born, his job and purpose was to be this, uh, to come in the spirit and power of Elijah and prepare God's people for the return of, of his Messiah, uh, to the return of this prophet, but who was so much more than a prophet.

Uh, and so he gives him this answer.

And apparently that was good enough.

And, but they questioned his baptism.

Verse 25, they asked him, then why are you baptizing if you are neither the Christ nor Elijah nor the prophet?

So they, they completely missed the point, right?

Cause they're like, okay, let's just, that's cool.

Great job quoting Isaiah.

Uh, but you didn't really answer our question.

Are you, since you are not, uh, the Messiah and you are not Elijah and you're not the prophet.

Why are you baptizing?

First 26, John answered them.

I baptized with water, but among you stands one you do not know.

Even he who comes after me, the strap of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.

These things took place in Bethany across the Jordan where John was baptized.

And so John gives them an answer.

And I'm assuming by the answer that he gave them, they were just like, this guy's weird because we don't see any more of the interaction and he kind of, he answers the question in his own way.

Anyways, at the time, uh, baptism, this wouldn't have been a new idea or a new concept and, but the leaders are questioning the authority in which John is baptized.

And so if it's not the authority of the Messiah and it's not under the authority of Elijah and it's not under the authority of the prophet, who are you?

What is the purpose for this baptism?

And John replies, there is one coming who I am not worthy to untie his sandals.

And this would be a, a, a peek into first century culture, right?

Uh, the rabbi would have disciples and followers.

Um, and, uh, we, we kind of get a glimpse of that relationship of that rabbi disciple relationship in, uh, well, we'll see it in the book of John later when, uh, Jesus tells a few of his disciples, he says, uh, Hey, go ahead of us and prepare the Passover meal for us.

There's a guy waiting, go talk to him.

He'll he's got a spot for us.

And so he sends them out to do a job, to do a task that would have very much so been the, uh, rabbi disciple sort of relationship.

Hey, you go do this, go get this prepared for us.

We've got this covered.

Um, which is very different than the job of a slave.

So, uh, a disciple could go and do tasks.

Obviously a slave would go into task, do tasks, but the different, the differentiate, the differentiation between a disciple and a slave is that a slave would have to deal with feet, would have to take off sandals, would have to wash feet, would have to wash clothes.

Would have to wash feet.

This was a, this was the job of a slave.

And again, you have to think back to first century.

They didn't have, uh, paved roads like we had today.

There would have been horses or donkeys or things that would just drop their, their dunk, uh, drop their dunk wherever they want to.

And, uh, so you're walking these roads.

There's feces.

It's just gross.

Right.

Uh, and that was not the job of a disciple, but the job of a slave.

And John has asked, Hey, whose authority are you baptizing under?

And John's John the Baptist's reply is the authority in which I am baptizing.

I am not even worthy to be his slave.

I am so far below him that I, I can't even touch his sandals.

Uh, which is just crazy.

John is saying he's so superior to me.

He is so set apart from me.

Of course, later we'll get the words of John.

He must become greater because I must become less.

He must increase so that I decrease.

And he's, John is, is essentially saying, don't look to me and what I'm baptizing or why I'm baptizing, but look to him, he's coming.

The Messiah is coming.

And this baptism that I'm doing is, is in preparation for this Messiah, this coming Christ.

So he's saying, prepare yourself, prepare your heart, make room for the King.

Clear out the roads.

Like make space for the King.

He is coming.

It's very interesting that.

This is the first character we meet in the book of John.

We get this prologue that has Jesus talks all about Jesus.

And then the first, uh, non-divine character we meet is John the Baptist who looks like John the Baptist.

The second character we meet is John the Baptist who was looking at it from our standpoint and even of the credentials of the day.

John was pretty credential.

Like, I mean, we just read about it.

He was the final old Testament prophet.

This guy was legit.

He had, he was filled with the Holy Spirit from even while he was in the womb.

Like this guy is legit.

He's also the first character we meet in the book of John.

And what is his first, what is the, the, the first response to the first character we meet in the book of John?

I am unworthy to tie his sandals.

We have to think about if we were hearing this or reading this for the first time, not as 21st century believers.

And think about John is making this argument for the Messiah.

He's making this argument for, uh, that Jesus was the, as John the Baptist will say here in the next, in verse 29, uh, behold the lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.

And the first person we meet who is not Jesus in this text is John the Baptist, again, very credentialed.

And he says, I'm not worthy to untie his sandals.

And he says, I'm not worthy to untie his sandals.

And he says, I'm not worthy to untie his sandals.

What a way to start a letter.

What a way to start a book.

I mean, would you not be intrigued to go like, okay, who is this?

Who is this Jesus that you're speaking of that even John the Baptist who would later be beheaded because of what he did and, and, and what he, what he stood for and this Messiah, who is this Jesus that John the Baptist says he won't even touch his sandals.

Even the prophets are unworthy of the Messiah.

We need to be reminded that we are not worthy.

We are not even worthy to be a slave.

We are not even worthy to be a slave to the Messiah.

But yet he calls us friend.

We are not worthy to be in the family of God.

Yet we are his sons and daughters.

And we need to one, embody the humility of John the Baptist.

But also take a moment to recognize the incredible holiness of the Messiah.

Incredible holiness, the incredible worthiness of our Savior, of our Messiah.

If John the Baptist is saying he is unworthy to even untie his sandals, man, how often do I take for granted stepping into the presence of the most high God?

How often do I take for granted the, the ability to step into his presence?

And this morning, I wanted us to see and feel how, one, how good our God is, but also how incredible he is.

And yet it is by his grace that we get to receive it.

And yet it is by his grace that we receive it.

And yet it is by his grace that we receive it.

And yet it is by his grace that we receive it.

And yet it is by his grace that we receive it.

And yet it is by his grace that we receive it.

And yet it is by his grace that we get to receive it.

And it is by his grace that we get to enter his courts with confidence, knowing that our mediator has gone before us.

Man, that is amazing.

And so how could we not respond in gratitude?

How could we not respond in worship when the King of Kings has gone before us?

God is so holy.

He is so set apart and we are so even worthy to speak his name.

And so thank you, Jesus, that you came down to earth and gave yourself for us, gave yourself for our sins so that we could receive the gift of salvation.

That is the good news of our King who came to earth, lived a perfect life, died a sinner's death and resurrected to eternal life and will one day return again.

Thank you, Jesus, for your salvation, for your life.

And that one day, whether we come to you or you beat us down to earth, that you will return again and we have the assurance of eternal life in you.

Thank you, Jesus.

That's all I got.
