---
layout: sermon
title: "John 5:16-30"
date: "2024-12-01T14:48:58.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/95245233/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-11-2%2F390833111-44100-2-8f2a2274a77bb.m4a"
duration: "21:55"
scripture: "John 5:16-30"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: "<p>TL;DR:</p><p>God and Jesus are always working. </p><p>Jesus is equal in works with the Father.</p><p>Jesus is equal in power with the Father.</p><p>Jesus is the judge.</p><p>Jesus is worthy of worship.</p>"
guid: d27822fb-2939-4d71-8b20-24485e863fab
episode_id: c848ff34
---

<p>TL;DR:</p><p>God and Jesus are always working. </p><p>Jesus is equal in works with the Father.</p><p>Jesus is equal in power with the Father.</p><p>Jesus is the judge.</p><p>Jesus is worthy of worship.</p>

## Transcription

John chapter 5.

We're going to be looking in on verses 16 through 30.

And we can take it just from...why don't we start our reading actually at verse 16 and then we will go...we can stop at 30.

That's fine.

So if somebody just wants to read...

I can read.

Sweet.

And this is why the Jews were persecuting Jesus because he was doing things on the Sabbath.

But Jesus answered them, My Father is working until now and I am working.

This is why the Jews were seeking all the more to kill him because not only was he breaking the Sabbath, but he was even calling God his own Father, making himself equal to God.

So Jesus said to them, Truly, truly, I say to you, the Son can do nothing of his own accord, but only what he sees the Father doing.

For whatever the Father does, that the Son does likewise.

For the Father loves the Son and shows him all that he himself is doing.

And greater works than these will he show him.

So that you may marvel.

For as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives life to whom he will.

For the Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the Son.

That all may honor the Son just as they honor the Father.

Whoever does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him.

Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever hears my word and believes in him who sent me has eternal life.

He does not come into judgment, but passes from death to life.

Truly, truly, I say to you, an hour is coming and is now here, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live.

For as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son also to have life in himself.

And he has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of man.

Do not marvel at this, for an hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear his voice, and come out, those who have done good to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil to the resurrection of judgment.

And I do nothing on my own.

As I hear, I judge.

And my judgment is just, because I seek not my own will, but the will of him who sent me.

Awesome.

Thank you.

There is a ton here.

And yeah, it's like a whole course on Jesus saying who he is.

And it's a lot, and it's a lot of repetition, and it's a lot of things.

But it also kind of reveals, like, one, how Jesus is related to the Father, not like, like, how him and the Father are equal, yet separate.

And we also see why the Jews wanted to kill him.

Yeah.

Because he is just attacking them.

By simply just saying who he is, which is pretty gnarly.

Verse 16, The Jews were persecuting Jesus because he broke one of their Sabbath rules.

Not one of God's Sabbath rules.

One of their Sabbath rules.

And we don't see it in the ESV translation, but one of the words here in verse 17, we get the word answered, but the verb used here is more of, like, making a defense of the charges made against you.

So Jesus is not giving an answer, but he's, like, going to the stand, like, swearing, swearing in on the Bible, right?

That's funny.

And saying, like, this is not, I'm not just here, just like, we're not talking.

This is, I am dropping the facts on you legally.

In response to the Sabbath, Jesus goes, my Father is working until now, and I am working.

So Jesus is making a claim that God doesn't stop working, and neither does the Son.

We'll talk about this a little bit more, but first, let's remember Jesus' words about the Sabbath in Mark chapter 2.

We could sort of end it right there, but there's some, there's some things here as we get to, we could see the relation of how just God and Jesus operate.

And, of course, the Spirit.

This is in reference to, this passage in Mark is in reference to eating and harvesting, which was also in the list of those 39 types of work.

But what we do learn from this is Jesus is Lord of the Sabbath.

And there's actually been a lot of, like, discourse and argument about this concept of Jesus and God breaking Sabbath law.

Since, as Jesus said in the John passage, that God never stops working, and so therefore the Son never stops working.

And Jesus, sorry, if God were to stop all things, this is, this is a question we could think about for a little bit, but don't think about too much, or else you'll start spinning.

If God were to stop all that he does, who would keep the world going?

Remember, he has the whole world in his hand, right?

That's silly, but, uh, we, if we're not careful, we can have, we can take on this, uh, sort of mentality that God is like a great watchmaker who sets all the cogs and everything right, and then gets it spinning, and then just checks in every now and then to change the batteries.

Um, but, God is not, again, a distant God.

God works continuously.

Is he breaking his own law?

No.

Uh, and I'm gonna read this quote because it's from a first century rabbi who, uh, who had, how, just, I mean, how, this is how he understood it to be, and how, uh, I think, take it or leave it, but, it's pretty good.

Um, although God works constantly, he cannot rightly be charged with violating Sabbath law, since, one, the entire universe is his domain.

That's Isaiah 6, verse 3.

And, therefore, he never carries anything outside of it.

If you remember, uh, never mind, I just mentioned it, but one of the Sabbath rules is that you cannot carry anything outside of, like, what you've made.

And so, he's carrying the thing that he's made.

Otherwise put, uh, God fills the whole world.

It's Jeremiah 23.

And, in any case, God lifts nothing to a height greater than his own stature.

God never stops.

He never stops.

Never stops working.

Uh, and so Jesus, rightfully so, applies that to himself.

Why?

Verse 19.

The son can do nothing of his own accord, but only what he sees the father doing.

For whatever the father does, that the son does likewise.

So, uh, Jesus has always seen the father do what he's done.

And so, Jesus will do the same.

Also, we see Jesus just claimed to be the son of God.

And we get a, uh, sort of a glimpse into the, uh, Trinitarian sort of, uh, dynamic here.

Uh, a glimpse into what theologians call the, um, uh, economic trinity.

Um, the roles of the trinity.

That's like the, the roles and work of the trinity.

They distinguish among the three persons of God, father, son, spirit, um, in terms of what they call the economy of God.

Um, it is the father who sends the son into the world for our redemption.

It is the son who acquires our, our redemption for us.

And it is the spirit who applies that redemption to us.

Three distinct roles.

That's obviously not in, in whole.

That is just in part, uh, of what they do.

We do not have three gods.

We have one God in three persons and three persons are distinguished in terms of what they do.

So, for the father loves the son and this is verse 20, the father loves the son and shows him all that he himself is doing and greater works than these will he show him so that you may marvel.

So, it is the father out of love for the son, he shows him all that he does.

And the son, out of love for his father, obeys him perfectly and does whatever the father does.

To the point that people who observe the son and wonder and marvel at what he does, two things happen, right?

The son, by his obedience to his father, is acting in such a way that he is revealing the father.

He's doing the father's deeds, performing the father's will.

So, the son's obedience reveals who God is.

Jesus' obedience reveals to us who God is.

And if that is the case, then the nature and character of God does not depend on God's love for us, his creation, but on the love of the father for the son and on the love of the son for the father.

So, the, because of this mirroring of each other, and because of, of course, what Jesus has done and will do, the love between them reflects and shines upon us.

Because of Jesus' obedience, because of that obedience, and through that obedience, we get a revelation, a revealing of God and Jesus.

Because of that, we, uh, we receive the love.

Verse 21, for as the father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the son gives life to whom he will.

Uh, the Old Testament writers, they believed that it was God alone who could raise the dead.

And, uh, later, we would get a, some more first century rabbis.

There were sort of three keys, if you will, uh, three keys that remain in God's hand.

The key of rain.

God controls the rain.

That's, we get that from Deuteronomy.

The key of the womb.

We get that in Genesis 30.

And the key of the resurrection of the dead.

We get that in Ezekiel.

Um, and according to the first century rabbis, Elijah was recognized as sort of an exception.

Um, but he served as a representative of God in raising the dead.

And Jesus, his authority in this regard goes beyond Elijah, uh, for the son gives life to whom he is pleased to give it.

And the son can do nothing by himself.

That's in verse 19 of John.

His will, his pleasure, his choices are so completely at one with the father that it is no, that, uh, essentially any crucial decision is theirs.

Although they are separate, it's their decision because they are so in tune with each other.

And so Jesus is not just a representative of God's power.

Like Elijah was, he was representing the power of God to the dry bones.

Again, this was in reference to the passage in Ezekiel.

And, um, cause God tells Elijah to do that.

Um, but, uh, just as Jesus chose a man out of the crowd of these sick people in Bethsaida, uh, so Jesus chooses whom to give life.

For as the father raised the dead and gives them life, so also the son gives life to whom he will.

Verse 22, for the father judges, no one, but has given all judgment to the son.

The father does not judge, but as delegated the task of judgment to his son.

Why?

So verse 23, that all may honor the son, just as they honor the father, whoever does not honor the son does not honor the father who sent him.

If you want to get to God, you must go through Jesus.

People will try to get to God in many different ways and many different experiences.

But if you do not honor the son, then you do not honor the father.

Verse 24, truly, truly, I say to you, whoever hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life.

He does not come into judgment, but has passed from death to life.

If you hear Jesus's words, you hear God's words because the son can do nothing, but what the father has told him to do and only do what he has seen the father do.

If you hear Jesus's words and believe in the father, yes, eternal life, but we pass from death to life.

Uh, if I could put it as simply as I would like to death to life is not just on your deathbed.

Coming to new life in Christ starts when you hear his word and believe we get to experience the part of new life and experience the blessings of new creation now, not just when we die.

Verse 25, truly, truly, I say to you, an hour is coming and is now here when the dead will hear the voice of the son of God and those who hear will live for as the father has life in himself.

So he has granted the son also to have life in himself and he has given him authority to execute judgment because he is the son of man.

God has life in himself.

Jesus has life in himself.

Those who hear the son will judge some to life because Jesus is the son of man.

Do not marvel at this verse 28 for an hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear the voice and come out.

Uh, one of the things I love teaching about teaching verse by verse is that we can go back and see what the author had already said about the subject before we just take a glimpse at a, of the middle of the letter, or I guess we're still in like the first quarter of the letter.

So John, we're, we're going to look at these two concepts of, from the last verse that we just read, uh, verse 29, those who have done good to the resurrection of life and those who have done evil to the resurrection of judgment, right?

That's like good, evil, heaven, hell, right?

Uh, okay.

So let's look at evil first, start bad, go good, right?

Nice.

Uh, John three, verse 19.

And this is the judgment.

The light has come into the world and people love the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil.

Now we hear that and let's read what this same passage says about those who have done good, but whoever does what is true comes to the light so that all may be clearly seen.

So, whoa, so that it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God.

So I'm going to read five, 28 through 30.

Do not marvel at this for an hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear his voice and come out.

Those who have done good to the resurrection of life and those who have done evil to the resurrection of judgment.

I can do nothing on my own.

As I hear, I judge and my judgment is just because I seek not my own will, but the will of those who sent me.

So even as we just read and we look at the works of the evil, this isn't like, uh, trying to earn your way into heaven.

This isn't like that thing.

It's an understanding of the evil have loved the darkness rather than light because their works were evil and the good is understanding your evil and turning to God who has, as John says in chapter three, verse 21, it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God.

Again, that's nothing to do with our works.

Jesus' judgment will be perfect because like everything else he says and does in his judgment, he is completely dependent on the word and the will of his father.

Jesus is incredible.

And the fact that we have been given him is obviously a gift and we can hope diligently knowing that when he returns, he will be, we will be treated not based on our righteousness, but his.

Um, too long.

There's, there's this thing on the internet, TLDR too long.

Didn't read.

We covered a lot of ground today.

So I've got a too long.

Didn't read God and Jesus are always working.

Jesus is equal in works with the father.

Jesus is equal in power with the father.

Jesus is the judge and Jesus is worthy of worship.

God and Jesus are always working.

Jesus is, Jesus is equal in works with the father.

Jesus is equal in power with the father.

Jesus is the judge and Jesus is worthy of worship.

That's all I got.
