---
layout: sermon
title: "John 3:14-21"
date: "2024-10-20T16:48:34.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/93342562/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-9-21%2F388471771-44100-2-564dd09d3099e.m4a"
duration: "26:38"
scripture: "John 3:14-21"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>The most famous verse in the Bible</p>\n
guid: 7cdde0b0-54c8-436d-be31-59cb3cba93e9
episode_id: 86de3799
---

## Transcription

I'm gonna jump in here and we'll read John chapter 3 verses 1 through 21 and then we'll spend the bulk of our time in verses 14 through 21, but we'll read this whole exchange here with Jesus and Nick and whoever else is with them.

If somebody wants to read chapter 3 verses 1 through 21.

This man came to Jesus by night and said to him, Rabbi, we know that you were a teacher come from God, for no one can do these things that you do unless God is with him.

Jesus answered him, truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

Nicodemus said to him, how can a man be born when he is old?

Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born?

Jesus answered, truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God.

That which is born of a flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit.

Do not marvel that I said to you, you must be born again.

The wind blows where it wishes and you hear it sound, but you do not know where it comes from or where it goes.

So it is whichever one who is born of the spirit.

Nicodemus said to him, how can these things be?

Jesus answered him, are you the teacher of Israel and yet do not understand these things?

Truly, truly, I say to you, we speak of what we know and bear witness to what we have seen, but you do not receive our testimony.

If I have told you earthly things and you do not believe, how can you believe if I tell you heavenly things?

No one has ascended into heaven except he who descended from heaven, the son of man.

And Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be lifted up, that whoever believes in him may have eternal life.

For God so loved the world that he gave his only son that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.

For God did not send his son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through him.

Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe is condemned already because he has not believed in the name of the only son of God.

And this is the judgment.

The light has come into the world and people love the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil.

For everyone who does wicked things, hates the light and does not come to the light lest his works should be exposed.

But whoever does what is true comes to the light so that it may be clearly seen what his works have been carried out.

Awesome.

So last week we left off with the cliffhanger.

You guys had no idea what was coming next unless you read ahead.

But we started looking at this conversation between Jesus and Nicodemus and we kind of, the question we left off is what we just heard, right?

Nicodemus asked Jesus, how can these things be?

And then Jesus goes, I thought you were a teacher of the law.

Do you not understand?

Like how do you not get these things?

How do you not see these things?

And then Jesus, after he rebukes him and yeah, after he rebukes him, he goes and he throws in some major Old Testament callbacks, right?

First, you see Jacob's ladder.

Again, this is the second time now in John that we see this callback to Jacob's ladder where Jacob has his dream and on it he sees angels ascending and descending to heaven, right?

I believe it's Genesis 22.

He says, unsure, somewhere in the 20s.

And then earlier when it's mentioned in John, Jesus is saying that he is Jacob's ladder or John says that I can't remember which one anyways.

But then a second time we see this ascending and descending and Jesus says that he has descended into heaven or sorry, descended into earth.

And then we see this amazing callback to Numbers, the book of Numbers, chapter 21, where Jesus says, and as Moses lifted up the servant in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up.

Okay, let's pause here because we got to go back to this story.

And it's so cool, like our perspective, because we can actually look back at the Old Testament and see in the midst of all of these things, it's like so clearly a foreshadow to Jesus.

And so let me read it for us.

Numbers 21, we'll start in verse four and six.

From Mount Hor, they sent out by the way to the Red Sea to go around the land of Edom and the people became impatient on the way.

And the people spoke against God and against Moses.

Why have you brought us up from out of Egypt to die in the wilderness?

For there is no food and no water and we loathe this worthless food.

Then the Lord sent fiery serpents among the people and they bit the people so that many people of Israel died.

Crazy.

So okay, the people are grumbling against God and Moses, right?

And like going all the way back to them being taken from slavery, freed from slavery, and now they're wandering in the desert and they're like, we don't like this manna that shows up six days out of the week.

We don't like this quail that shows up six days out of the week.

Like how, like you provide for us and it's like, no, all I want to eat is chicken nuggets, right?

A lot of us who are parents of young children can probably relate.

And so, or maybe not, sometimes all I want is chicken nuggets.

So they're like, it's worthless, right?

They literally say it is.

We loathe this worthless food.

We're so tired of this food.

How dare you provide for us in the middle of a desert where there is no food, where there is no rain, and yet our bellies are full and we're going to complain and complain and complain.

And so what does God do?

He sends a plague again, right?

It's like, so he's, from our perspective, it seems like God is just like, okay, you saw all these plagues that I did, not to you, but to the people who held you in captive, and now I'm going to send another plague on you.

And so then the Lord sends these fiery serpents, whether it was like raining snakes, or if they came up from the ground, or from around a rock, we don't know.

I'm assuming all three.

And then they start biting the Israelites and what feels like fire, right?

Like, of course, these weren't snakes with fire coming out of their tails.

It was probably the bite that felt like fire, right?

I mean, we could assume, maybe both.

Again, for your visual, for my visual, I'm kind of assuming both, because it's just kind of funny that it's not us.

Praise God.

And so God sends these serpents among the people, they bite them, and many of the people died.

For many of us, let's take a step back.

We probably all hate snakes, except for Silas, maybe Connor, I don't know.

Um, I could not imagine these snakes, whether they again, came from behind a rock, came through the rock, came just, I mean, out of the ground, from the sky.

Like, this is a nightmare, if I ever had one.

And then the snakes just don't appear, they start attacking you.

Like, they make a beeline for you.

The only reason these snakes are there are to bite you, right?

Like, absolutely terrible.

Um, but yet this, this is the judgment of God.

These snakes are symbolizing the judgment of God.

But thankfully, it's not the end of the story.

Numbers 21, seven through nine says, and the people came to Moses and said, We have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord and against you.

Pray to the Lord so that he may take away the serpents from us.

So Moses prayed for the people, and the Lord said to Moses, make a fiery serpent and set it on a pole.

And every, and everyone who is bitten, when he sees it, shall live.

So Moses made a bronze serpent and set it on a pole.

And if a serpent bit anyone, he would look at the bronze serpent and live.

One thing to note in the story, it, so it just said in that first part of the scripture that we read, it said that many of them died.

So not everyone who was bit looked to the bronze snake.

Did they have an opportunity?

Did they choose not to?

Again, I'm asking questions.

It doesn't give us these answers in the text, but clearly some of them did not turn their eyes to the solution.

We must also note here that this bronze serpent would stay around Israel.

It would stay with Israel for hundreds of years.

It's noted in second Kings 18, four that King Hezekiah would later destroy this bronze serpent.

So what was used one time to heal God's people turned into an idol.

We must note here for ourselves, sometimes we would rather see a miracle than be in the presence of a miracle worker.

So Jesus mentions this story and he continues on verse 14, verse 14, right?

And Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness.

So must the son of man be lifted up.

As, okay, so he says as a, as the serpent, serpent was lifted up.

Why was the serpent lifted up?

So that the Israelites could look upon it and be healed, be saved.

That is what it says.

He said, be saved.

That is what is going to happen to the son of man.

The son of man who to take from verse 13, descended to earth is going to be lifted up.

Why?

Verse 15, that whoever believes in him may have eternal life.

Now, of course, we can look back at this with some clarity and assurance of what Jesus was talking about, because we know Jesus later would be taken up on a cross and do what he said he would do, but not Nicodemus, right?

Nicodemus, they're having this conversation.

Jesus is not yet lifted up on the cross, but Nicodemus would have understood the reference back in that story of numbers.

D.

A.

Carson wrote this in his commentary and usually I reference it, but this was a big chunk quote that I just want to credit him to.

He said, Nicodemus was being challenged to turn to Jesus for new birth in much the same way as the ancient Israelites were commanded to turn to the bronze snake for new life.

Only when Nicodemus saw Jesus on the cross, or perhaps only in still later reflection on the cross, would it become clear that the lifting up exaltation of Jesus took place on a brutal block of wood on a forsaken site outside of Jerusalem.

I thought that was good, and so I got a full on quote there.

Now, another thing of note here as we turn to the infamous passage, John 3 16, and maybe in your Bible you have red letters.

Some Bibles put it in red letters, some Bibles don't.

It's unclear here where John's commentary starts or his writing starts and where Jesus's words stop.

And so some commentators say it is the words of Jesus, some don't.

Either way, the truth remains the same.

But as we read this, I want us to read it with fresh eyes, because so often do we see it slapped on a football player's eye black, so often do we see it on a billboard that the power and truth of John 3 16 can so easily just get just breezed by us.

We can just kind of breeze by it.

Of course we know it's truth, of course we understand it, but still when there's so much familiarity to it, it can almost lose its its power, its sting, its truth.

And so let's just take a step back and try to look at this verse with fresh eyes.

For God so loved the world that he gave his only son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.

In fact, let's read it in context, because I think when we read it in context, especially having more understanding of the verses prior, it to me it's even more powerful.

Verse 14, and as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be lifted up, that whoever believes in him may have eternal life.

For God so loved the world that he gave his only son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.

And this is the gospel, and immediately I want to ask, why would God give us away to him?

Why?

From the beginning of creation, we have screwed God over, we have failed him, we have just as the Israelites did all the way back in Numbers, we have called his provision worthless.

With the same mouth that has praised him, we curse him.

Not just curses at him, but curses at each other.

So why do I deserve away to God?

Because he loves.

He loves the world he created, but even more so he loves humanity because he breathed his image inside of us, and because he promised he would save us.

It is in his nature to love.

He can't not love us, and that is crazy.

Over the last decade there was a worship song that I'm sure many of us know, and it's called reckless love.

And even to this day, this year, I had a conversation around this song, and it using the word reckless, right?

Like the love of God can't be reckless.

It cannot be this like reckless.

That sounds just awful.

It's reckless, right?

God is not reckless, of course, but how could God's love not be reckless?

The fact that he loves humans is quite reckless.

He loves things that despise him, that turn away from him, that rebuke him, that love him in one moment and turn around the next.

Like his love is not reckless, but we sure are reckless.

And so we could say that the recklessness is not on his part, but it's on ours.

And so therefore you put them together, and you could say it's reckless.

I was listening to a podcast that was talking through this John 3 passage, and one of the pastors and commentators, he called the love of God promiscuous, which can seem kind of like crazy, but once you look past this sexual definition of it, promiscuous is indiscriminate.

It's wild.

Think of the story that Jesus tells, I believe it's both in Matthew and Mark.

It's the parable of the sower.

He sows, God is the farmer.

That's very explicit in the text.

And the farmer throws seed on good soil, in thorns, in the rocks, and on the road.

And that's pretty reckless, right?

You don't just throw good seed on a road where it's going to be trampled, where it's going to be destroyed.

A normal farmer would put the seed on just good soil because he knows he has a higher chance to get a better crop.

But God throws seed on roads, in thorns, in the rocks, because only the good farmer, only the good shepherd can turn a seed on the road into a fruitful fig tree.

Only God can take a seed that has been battered, bruised, torn to shreds, and can raise up a tree in the middle of a road.

Only Jesus can take a wretch like me and save me, save you, save us.

Only Jesus can take a wretch like me.

Only God can throw a seed on the street and spring up a tree.

Only by the love of God could we sing, Amazing grace, how sweet the sound that saved a wretch like me.

For God so loved the world that he gave his son that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.

For God did not send his son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through him, whoever believes in him is not condemned.

Why did God, why did not, God did not send Jesus to condemn the world.

Why?

Because we've already been condemned.

We didn't need any more condemnation.

We had the law.

We already knew we were in wrong standing with God.

We needed a savior and so he sent Jesus not to condemn us but to save us.

We are like those Israelites crying on the desert floor after being bitten by a fiery serpent, but there is a remedy.

Just as the Israelites could have looked up to the bronze serpent to be saved, to be healed, to be made new, can we look up to Jesus to be saved, to be healed, to be made new, and those who look to him will not perish in their sins and face eternal condemnation but will in fact have eternal life.

And verse 18 continues and gives us a very sobering alternative.

But whoever does not believe is condemned already because he has not believed in the name of the only son of God.

Those who look to Jesus escape condemnation but those who refuse to trust him are at a deficit.

And sometimes I myself wonder how can I mean look at this world look at the the the craziness of this world look at like just our own bodies and the you know if we're one meter closer to the sun we're all melting if we're one meter further from the sun we're all freezing like all these factors of of our world in our life and even we have like top scientists who are like there must be a god there's like no way who's like anyways how I sometimes wonder why someone could not turn to Jesus right um and whether it's the words of John or the words of Jesus we it's inspired and it answers my question in verse 19.

And this is the judgment the light has come into the world and people love the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil.

For everyone who does wicked things hates the light and does not come to the light lest his works should be exposed but whoever does what is true comes to the light so that it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God.

This is our natural state we are in darkness we love the darkness rather than the light we love our wicked deeds over what is true but Jesus gives us an invitation to the light through his life death and resurrection and so why do people not turn to Jesus obviously it's for a plethora of reasons to Jesus obviously it's for a plethora of reasons but I think if we get down to the core root of it it's probably pride because we love the darkness we don't want to be exposed we don't want to be humiliated we don't want to show our our true colors because that hurts me but whoever does what is true comes to the light so that it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God all of this can happen all of this is carried out through my good works no we come to the light so that it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God that his works have been carried out not by me but in God and that is the gospel that I am already condemned that I love darkness rather than light but through the life death and resurrection through the raising up of Jesus do I have a chance to step into the light to step into the light for God so loved the world that he gave his only son that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life and that's all I got
