---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 3:10-14"
date: "2024-05-26T17:29:15.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/87229853/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fproduction%2F2024-4-26%2F378812823-48000-1-8b21335e2810e.m4a"
duration: "29:34"
scripture: "Galatians 3:10-14"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: The Gospel through the Old Testament\n
guid: b97bf38f-5ce2-4ecb-b843-1d58c16dd9ae
episode_id: 95f663cc
---

## Transcription

We're going to be in Galatians chapter 3 this morning.

And as we turn there, if someone could turn to, well, I guess we're all turning to chapter 3.

And we'll read verse 1 through verse 14.

And then we'll really focus in on 10 through 14 and kind of turn a new leaf in.

In the book.

So Galatians 3 verse 1 all the way through 14.

Somebody wants to read that.

I can read it.

I'm reading CSB.

You foolish Galatians, who has cast a spell on you before whose eyes Jesus Christ was publicly portrayed as crucified?

I only want to learn this from you.

Did you receive the spirit by the works of the law or by believing what you heard?

Are you so foolish after beginning by the spirit, are you now finishing by the flesh?

Did you experience so much for nothing if in fact it was for nothing?

So then does God give you the spirit and work miracles among you by doing your work?

Oh, sorry.

Among you by your doing the work of the law or is it by believing what you heard?

Just like Abraham who believed God and it was credited to him for righteousness.

You know then that those who have faith, these are Abraham's sons.

Now that the scripture saw in advance that God would justify the Gentiles by faith and proclaimed the gospel ahead of time to Abraham, saying all the nations will be blessed through you.

Consequently, those who have faith are blessed with Abraham who had faith.

For all who rely on the works of the law are under a curse because it is written, everyone who does not do everything written in the book of the law is cursed.

Now it is clear that no one is justified before God by the law because the righteous will live by faith.

But the law is not based on faith.

Instead, the one who does these things will live by them.

Christ redeemed us from this curse of the law by becoming a curse for us because it is written, curse is everyone who is hung on a tree.

The purpose was that the blessing of Abraham would come to the Gentiles by Christ Jesus so that we could receive the promised spirit through faith.

So in the previous verses, Paul shows the implications of justification, which again, justification is our declared righteousness before God made possible by Christ's death and resurrection for us.

That's what justification means.

And so the implications of justification by faith in Jesus, and now he's going to reference many Old Testament passages and Paul will prove what happens when the Galatians play out their current beliefs and teachings of justification by faith and works of the law, mainly circumcision.

And so Paul is essentially posing the question, if salvation is by faith alone, what happens if a person tries to secure salvation through his or her obedience to the law?

That's what Paul is kind of now asking and posing the questions.

If salvation is by faith alone, what happens if a person tries to secure salvation through his or her obedience to the law?

Okay, so going back to verse 10, for all who rely on works of the law are under a curse, for it is written, cursed be everyone who does not abide by all things written in the book of the law and do them.

Okay, so how today we'll kind of look is we'll essentially take it verse by verse because Paul essentially quotes an Old Testament reference for each verse and we'll dive into some of the deeper context without having to read it.

I'll just summarize the deeper context and we'll see how Paul is structuring this whole argument.

So Paul is quoting from Deuteronomy 27, 26, and it to show that if people try to bring their obedience to the law as the grounds for their salvation, the only thing they will secure for themselves is a curse.

So in the original context, Deuteronomy 27, it came toward the end of the renewal of the Mosaic covenant because, right, so going back, Exodus, Moses goes up to Mount Sinai, gets the Ten Commandments, gets the law.

Meanwhile, while he's up there, Aaron and the Israelites grow unsteady and they bring together and work together this golden calf that they make and craft and start worshipping this golden calf, all the while Moses is up communicating with God on behalf of the Israelites, comes down and he sees them with the Ten Commandments, he sees them worshipping this golden calf and Moses, out of anger, throws the Ten Commandments on the ground.

So like the law that God literally just like etched out of stone with his hand is now destroyed and Moses is upset.

And so Deuteronomy, literally like Deuteronomy, means do-over, essentially.

And so what God did for them back in Exodus, he's doing again in creating the law.

And so this is a renewal of the Mosaic covenant before the people of God had entered the promised land and God told them that through Moses, that if they were disobedient to the law, then they would merit the curses of the covenant.

So Israel was not just bound to certain portions of the law, but they were to continue in all which, in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them.

And as James would later say, to violate one part of the law was to violate the whole law.

So this is why Paul confidently states that those who rely on works of the law or their obedience to the law are under a curse.

The Mosaic law is a mirror.

That's how we view the Mosaic law.

In its fullness, the Mosaic law pointed to Christ, but the law itself was never intended for salvation.

It was intended to be a mirror.

It was a mirror into which we look to identify our sinfulness and to show us how we fall short.

So the law is a mirror to show us our sinfulness and show us how we fall short.

And Paul makes this point, and then he states that salvation is by faith alone and not by works.

Verse 11.

Now it is evident that no one is justified before God by the law, for the righteous shall live by faith.

And Paul quotes Habakkuk, chapter two, verse four, and in its original context, Habakkuk was a prophet and he complained bitterly to the Lord that Israel was no longer a holy nation.

Though they had once stood at the threshold of the promised land and vowed obedience to the law, so they were at the promised land saying, God, we will obey the law, the Israelites had abandoned their commitment and were living wickedly.

And God had already carried the northern kingdom of Israel off into captivity by the Babylonians, and now there was a threat to the southern community of Israel, to the tribe of Judah, and so they were essentially pleading to God, help us, help us.

And Habakkuk the prophet is like, these guys are like, they're idiots, essentially.

Like, you know what they're going to do, like, forget the covenant that you made with them.

And God's answer to Habakkuk was not that Israel should redouble its efforts and renew its obedience to the law to escape a Babylonian invasion, rather there were a faithful remnant, a faithful few, in the southern kingdom of Judah and had to live by faith in the covenant promises of the Lord.

So Paul calls back to this passage to make his point that salvation comes not through obedience but through faith in Christ, and that so he's, Paul is calling back to these, to this Habakkuk passage where where God reprimands the prophet and goes, no, there is a faithful few who believe by faith, not by a renewal of the covenant.

So Paul then continues to place faith and works against one another in verse 12.

And then now Apostle Paul gives another Old Testament passage, Leviticus 18.5, and this comes out of the application of the Mosaic covenant, of the Ten Commandments and other 613 laws that were, that they were given to the life of Israel and states the principle of the law.

So like 18.5 is the principle of the law.

If you obey, you live, if you disobey, you die.

It's like two options.

And then as the readers of this letter are reading this and hearing this and remembering this, they would clearly know their faults against the law.

They would know that they are not of the camp of Israelites who have obeyed it fully and deserve to live.

So therefore, Paul is going, you know that you have been disobedient to the law, so therefore you die.

And then Paul represents Jesus as the answer.

Verse 13, Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us, for it is written, curse is everyone who is hanged on a tree.

This quote is from Deuteronomy 21 23.

And in its original context, this passage described a fitting punishment for an offensive covenant breaker, one who had violated one who had violated the law to such a degree that his punishment needed to serve as a warning to others.

So like this curse of being hung on a tree was not just for the like typical law breaker.

It was for the law breaker who needed to be made an example of.

Like they needed to show like, hey, this is a serious crime.

This is a serious offense against the law of God and we need to make an example out of this person.

So they would stone them and then hang them on a tree.

And this action demonstrated God's curse on the covenant breaker.

And so what the Israelites earned for their unfaithfulness to the covenant was a curse.

And Jesus redeemed them out from under the curse of God by becoming a curse for them and for us.

And in his crucifixion, Christ suffered the curses of the covenant on behalf of the people of God.

So God's people were under the power of Satan, sin, death, and the curse of the law.

But God freed them through Jesus.

But as we know, this promise was not just for the Jews, but also the Gentiles.

Verse 14, so that in Jesus Christ, the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles so that we might receive the promised spirit through faith.

And there's a cacophony.

I've wanted to use that word for a few days now.

And so I decided this would be the right time.

There is a list of Old Testament passages that refer to this outpouring of God's spirit.

And, but the thing that needed to happen before that was the judgment of God needed to be resolved.

And so Paul is trying to show them and trying to again, these are Christians.

These are people who believed in Jesus, but he's reminding them that the judgment of God had been paid for through Christ.

And now there is an outpouring of the spirit, which these people like literally some of, I mean, this was written about 60 AD, 70 AD.

So some of them could have been literally at like Pentecost.

They could have been like, they could have watched Peter deliver that message.

They could have been in the, or at least had a family member or a friend who had heard and seen Acts chapter two, flaming tongues of fire.

And all these apostles and disciples are speaking in native tongues and declaring the gospel, the life, death and resurrection of Jesus in their native tongue.

Like they could have witnessed this.

And so they would have been well aware of the pouring out of God's spirit and that it happened, that the scriptures had been fulfilled and that Jesus did, or that God did what he said he would do when his judgment was fulfilled.

And so God fulfilled his promise to pour out his spirit on his people.

And it came not through their obedience, but despite their disobedience.

And so Paul is like trying to show them like, Hey, like this is the, this is it.

Like it has happened.

The promise was realized because of God's faithfulness and because Jesus fulfilled the obligations of the law bearing the curse of the covenant and securing redemption for the people of God.

The promise was fulfilled.

Paul is like, and I mean, we have gone snail slow through these 14 verses so that we would understand and see how important it is that we are people of faith for our salvation and justification.

Should there be works that follow our faith?

Yes.

Um, and I don't know if anyone has caught the key word in the last 14 verses that we've been reading for the last week, but the word faith in the ESV translation was used nine times in 14 verses, nine times in 14 verses, because Paul is trying to get these, again, believers to remember and see that it is through faith that we have been saved and are justified.

It is through faith, again, the definition or the meaning of justification is our declared righteousness before God made possible by Christ's death and resurrection and resurrection for us.

Our justification is not made possible by us.

Our justification is not made possible because of us.

And in fact, Paul is arguing our justification was made possible in spite of us.

That is the beauty of the law.

That is the beauty of our faith is that it is through faith, not that it is through works, what we could attain, what we could earn.

I've got an old dead guy quote as we wrap up.

His name is William Perkins.

He's from the 16th century, so a very old dead guy.

He said, when Paul says the law is not of faith, he sets down the main difference between the law and the gospel.

The law promises life to him that performs perfect obedience and that for his works.

The gospel promises life to him that does nothing in the cause of salvation, but only believes in Christ and it promises salvation to him that believes, yet not for his faith or for any works else, but for the merit of Christ.

The law then requires the doing to salvation and the gospel believing in nothing else.

I think it's a key thing that we understand and realize the difference between the law and the gospel.

And this is what Paul is arguing here and what Paul is like trying to nail down with this Galatian letter.

The law requires doing the law requires doing gospel requires belief.

And I think for us, the question is, what do you believe?

Because oftentimes what happens is what I believe about me, what I believe even about others, but let's just keep it at yourself.

What I believe about me shapes how I behave.

Shapes how I behave.

And the thing with the law was if I do it, I can fix it.

If I do it, I can fix it.

Just tell me what's wrong, I'll do it.

It's the law is looking at the symptom.

The gospel is looking at the illness.

The symptom, the law was don't do this, don't do that, don't do this.

So then all you're doing is fixing the symptom.

Fixing the symptom.

You're just putting a bandaid on an amputated leg.

You need more than that.

You need to go to the core of the issue.

And the core of the issue is what you believe.

It is the belief that looks at yourself and goes, I know I'm messed up.

I understand that.

But I am putting my faith in one who says, regardless of what I have done, all good, all bad, anywhere in between, I need someone to help me.

I need someone to save me.

I need someone to not just look at the symptom, but to actually look at the core issue of my heart and of my mind.

I don't know if you saw in the news, but the pope sat down for an interview for an interview and he said that everyone is good, essentially is what he said.

And which is like, no, first off, just straight up no.

But like also, biblically, we can look and see that not everyone is good.

It says in Jeremiah that the heart is evil, that the heart is deceptive.

And if there is this idea, and of course, like there is something in us that is good, because we were created in the image of God.

But again, that has nothing to do with what we bring to the table, because you didn't create you, I didn't create me.

And so again, this is something outside of our control.

But yes, humans, there is something good in us because we were created in the image of God who is good.

But what we produce from our lives is not good.

And if you have this belief that you are good, then you think you can do it all.

Then of course, all of your actions are justified, because you have the belief that you are good.

And so, of course, I can do whatever I want.

I'm good, because God says I'm good.

Well, the Pope said you're good.

That's not God.

For some.

And yeah, that hurts when we have to look internally and go, I am not good.

There's something wrong with me.

But I think for probably all of us, there has been, if not on the daily, times where you go like, oh, man, I actually do kind of suck.

Like, as Paul would say, I, what I want to do, I don't do, but what I do do, I despise doing, right?

Like, Paul, even himself was like, they're parts of me, I know I need to do that I am not doing.

And I think we all have the maturity to understand that and believe that there are parts of us that are just bad.

There is selfishness, there's anger, there's resentment, there's holding on to the past of others, of ourself.

There are things in us that are bad, there are thoughts in us that are bad.

And we have to go, we have to get to the point of the bad news to recognize and realize that God gives us the good news of Jesus Christ to not necessarily erase the bad in us, but he gives us the solution to the bad in us.

And he gives us the eternal cure of salvation, but he also gives us the daily growing and the daily uh, the daily gradual perfection to Jesus through sanctification, through the power of the Holy Spirit.

And so we have to realize that it starts with our belief.

Do you believe you are 100% good?

Do you believe you are right all the time?

If so, like take a step back, ask a friend, ask a spouse, ask your mother or your father or a sibling, ask somebody, hey where have I been wrong?

What's it like to be like on the other side of me?

Right?

Like that's a question that's usually hard to ask, but like other people can show you your faults, can show you where you're wrong.

And we have to have this understanding and belief that there is part of me that is wrong, there's part of me that is bad, so that I can lay myself down and say, Jesus, you bought me with your life, death and resurrection.

What do you want to do with me?

What do you want to do with me?

But it takes that belief that Jesus is the answer, that you cannot earn salvation, that you cannot be the solution to your problems, you cannot be the solution to your life.

It must be something out of this world, out of this life to save us, to fulfill us, to show us how to live and how to be.

And of course for us we would all go, yeah it's my creator, it's Jesus.

He is the answer, he is the author and perfecter of our faith.

And so my question, rhetorical, is what do you believe?

Because as we just read for the past few weeks, the belief of the Galatians was leading and creating a false gospel.

And so I would hate for your belief in what you, in the part that you play in your salvation, the part that you play in your relationship with Jesus, I would hate for you to be building a false gospel because your belief about who Jesus is and what he did was wrong.

What do you believe?

Do you believe the gospel of Jesus Christ?

Do you believe that Jesus was who he said he was, did what he said he did, lived a perfect life so that you and I don't have to, fulfilled Old Testament covenants?

Do you believe that Jesus was both fully man and fully God?

He took the weight of sin, not just for those living when he lived, but for all of eternity.

He took the weight of sin and exchanged that to us for new life and for a pouring out of his spirit.

Does your belief start there?

That you had nothing to do with it, but accept it and receive it.

Because if your belief starts there, then eventually, just as Paul will get to in Galatians, the actions of the flesh are obvious, but the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control.

We'll get to the fruit of the spirit, but first we need to understand the fruit of the spirit.

We'll get to the fruit of the spirit, but first we need to start at what we believe.

The end.
