---
layout: sermon
title: John 5:31-47
date: 2024-12-08T18:25:01.000Z
category: sermon
audio_url: https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/95598361/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-11-9%2F391265729-44100-2-57ba98e87c201.m4a
duration: 24:47
scripture: John 5:31-47
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: "John the Baptist spoke of Jesus’ divinity.
Jesus’ works show his divinity.
The Father confirmed Jesus as His Son.
All Scripture points to Jesus."
guid: 253839da-97ac-4115-86f5-e01d8f2b06db
episode_id: 47c67019
---


<p>John the Baptist spoke of Jesus’ divinity.</p><p>Jesus’ works show his divinity.</p><p>The Father confirmed Jesus as His Son.</p><p>All Scripture points to Jesus.</p>

## Transcription

...because He was doing these things on the Sabbath.

But Jesus answered them, My Father is working until now, and I am working.

This was why the Jews were seeking all the more to kill Him, because not only was He breaking the Sabbath, but He was even calling God His own Father, making Himself equal with God.

So Jesus said to them, Truly, truly, I say to you, the Son can do nothing of His own accord, but only what He sees the Father doing.

For whatever the Father does, that the Son does likewise.

For the Father loves the Son, and shows Him all that He Himself is doing, and greater works than these will He show Him, so that you may marvel.

For as the Father raises the dead, and gives them life, so also the Son gives life, to whom He gives life.

For the Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the Son, that all may honor the Son, just as they honor the Father.

Whoever does not honor the Son, does not honor the Father who sent Him.

Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever hears my word, and believes Him who sent me, has eternal life.

He does not come into judgment, but has passed from death to life.

Truly, truly, I say to you, an hour is coming, and is now here, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live.

For as the Father has life in Himself, so He has granted the Son also to have life in Himself.

And He has given Him authority to execute judgment, because He is the Son of Man.

Do not marvel at this, for an hour is coming, when all who are in the tombs will hear His voice, and come out.

Those who have done good to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil to the resurrection of judgment.

I can do nothing on my own, as I hear I judge, and my judgment is just, because I seek not my own will, but the will of Him who sent me.

If I alone bear witness about myself, my testimony is not true.

There is another who bears witness about me, and I know that the testimony that He bears about me is true.

You said to John, and He has borne witness to the truth.

Not that the testimony that I receive is from man, but I say these things so that you may be saved.

He was a burning and shining lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in His light.

But the testimony that I have is greater than that of John, for the works that the Father has given me to accomplish, the very works that I am doing, bear witness about me that the Father has sent me.

And the Father who has sent me has Himself borne witness about me.

His voice you have never heard, His form you have never seen, and you do not have His word abiding in you, for you do not believe the one whom He has sent.

You search the Scriptures because you think that in them you have eternal life, and it is they that bear witness about me.

Yet you refuse to come to me that you may have life.

I do not receive glory from people, but I know that you do not have the love of God within you.

I have come in my Father's name, and you do not receive me.

If another comes in his own name, you will receive him.

How can you believe when you receive the glory from one another, and do not seek the glory that comes from the only God?

Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father.

There is one who accuses you, Moses, on whom you have set your hope.

For if you believed Moses, you would believe me.

For he wrote of me.

But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my words?

Thank you.

So, Jesus is here continuing in the section that we're looking at today, verses 31 through 47.

Jesus is continuing his defense.

Again, he's talking to the religious Jews.

He's talking to the religious leaders.

And the first section that we looked at last week, we sort of discovered and saw how it was more of a legal defense that he was putting.

And so, we saw in Jesus' claims that God and Jesus are always working.

That Jesus is equal in works with the Father.

That Jesus is equal in power with the Father.

Jesus is the judge, and Jesus is worthy of worship.

And now, he is continuing on the stand, if you will.

And at this time, but this time, he's bringing witnesses, right?

If you caught it there in that last part, it says witnesses multiple times.

And so, his first witness that he brings up is John the Baptist.

And Jesus says, John the Baptist's words are true.

And so, then the question is, what has John the Baptist said about Jesus?

In John 1, sort of 26 through 34, I'll read a couple of portions there.

It says, John the Baptist says, I baptize with water, but among you stands one you do not know.

Even he who comes after me, the straps of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie.

So, John the Baptist is saying, you know, as he was supposed to do, he was declaring the way for Jesus, preparing the way.

And it says, there is one who's coming after me, and I'm not worthy to untie his sandals.

Like, there is one who is so much, like, I am not even worthy to be a slave to him.

It's essentially what John the Baptist is saying.

Then, later in chapter 1, verse 29, it says, behold, the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.

This is, he of whom I said, after me, comes a man who ranks before me, because he was before me.

So, there is somebody who's coming after John the Baptist, but he's before John the Baptist.

Of course, not speaking in age, but in speaking in, I guess kind of speaking in age as well, that Jesus is before John the Baptist.

He has come before John the Baptist, although John the Baptist came before him.

We don't need to get twisted up in the semantics.

He calls him the Lamb of God, right?

And verse 31, I myself did not know him, but for this purpose I came baptizing with water, that he might be revealed to Israel.

So, there we see John is saying he was not just for this group of people.

He was for all of Israel.

And, of course, Jesus came for more than Israel.

He came for the whole world.

So, again, John the Baptist is calling Jesus the Son of God, the Lamb of God.

But then, if we needed it one more time, John chapter 3, verse 33, whoever receives his testimony, of course, John the Baptist is talking about Jesus, sets his seal to this, that God is true.

So, if you receive, John the Baptist is saying, if you receive the testimony of Jesus, you are saying that God is true.

So, there, the first witness that Jesus brings up in this courtroom is John the Baptist, who has said that Jesus is the Lamb of God, that Jesus is the Son of God, that if you receive his testimony, that God is true.

So, John is, or Jesus is saying, you need a witness, here's John the Baptist.

His second witness are his works.

But the testimony, back to John chapter 5, John 5, verse 36.

But the testimony that I have is greater than that of John.

For the works that the Father has given me to accomplish, the very works that I am doing, bear witness about me, that the Father has sent me.

So, Jesus' works are another witness that he is from God, that he is of God.

His works, his miracles, signs, and wonders are a witness that Jesus is from God.

But, we can know this because of what Nicodemus, one of these religious leaders, had said about Jesus.

He said in John 3, verse 2, Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one can do these signs that you do unless God is with him.

So, there we have the testimony of Nicodemus saying that only a person who is with God can do these miracles, signs and wonders.

So, Jesus' miracles prove that he is from God and of God.

Which leads us to a question that we're not going to get too in the weeds in because I don't want to.

What are miracles?

Second question, kind of off that, do miracles still happen today?

R.

C.

Sproul, which is a theologian, pastor, and just incredible work and body of ministry and brilliance.

As I was, as I posed this question to myself, and as I was studying, reading, learning, he had just a great teaching on this.

And, I think the most important thing, if I could distill it from R.

C.

Sproul to a bunch of different people that I was researching and looking up on this.

I think the important distinction that R.

C.

Sproul brought up, and I think kind of speaks to both sides of the argument of, if you believe miracles still happen today, if you don't.

R.

C., he first brought up the point, we need to define what miracles are.

What are miracles?

And, he brought up how theologians, a lot of times, distinguish miracles in two sort of ways.

In broad, and a narrow aspect of miracles.

Broad miracles, meaning God's ongoing supernatural power, sorry, God's ongoing supernatural power activity in the life of his people.

So, that can look like the answer to our prayers, the pouring out of his spirit, the changing of souls, and so on.

Of course, these broad miracles still happen today.

And then, we can define miracles in the broad sense and the narrow sense.

And, defining miracles in the narrow sense, you could define it as, A miracle is the extraordinary work performed by the immediate power of God in the external, perceivable world, which is an act against nature that only God can do, such as bringing life out of death or something out of nothing.

And so, usually, today, when we hear people say, People arguing that miracles still happen today, they stop at that narrow, at that narrow sense.

As far as bringing life out of death or something out of nothing.

And, I think that's an important distinction.

As we sort of hear about miracles, as we might see miracles, of course, God is still in control.

Of course, God is sovereign.

And, we're not going to get into this debate, because, one, this isn't necessarily the right format.

But, also, I would somewhat say it's not completely, it's not a salvific argument.

This argument doesn't negate or affirm salvation.

So, we can have different conclusions on that.

What's the point?

Jesus did these narrow miracles.

Even if we turn the page to John chapter 6, he's going to feed the thousands.

He's going to walk on water.

He's doing acts against nature.

He's doing, again, he will raise Lazarus from the dead.

Right?

He's making paralyzed men completely walk again.

Acts against nature.

Incredible.

And, these works are a witness that Jesus is from God.

The third witness.

The Father.

Back to John chapter 5, verse 37.

And, the Father who has sent me has himself borne witness about me.

His voice you have never heard.

His form you have never seen.

And, you do not have his word abiding in you.

For, you do not believe the one whom he has sent.

The Father has borne witness about Jesus.

Jesus, here, could be referring to his baptism.

Right?

Where we get the audible word of God.

It records it in Matthew chapter 3, saying, And behold, a voice from heaven said, This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.

Again, this is probably later in the timeline.

But, God audibly spoke about Jesus at the transfiguration.

Matthew 17, verse 5.

A bright cloud overshadowed them.

And, a voice from the cloud said, This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.

Listen to him.

So, the Father, God the Father, gives witness about Jesus.

The fourth witness.

The scriptures.

Verse 39.

You search the scriptures, because you think in them, you have eternal life.

And, it is they that bear witness about me.

Let's remember here, Jesus is talking to the religious leaders.

He was talking to some Old Testament loving and living people.

And, they thought that by knowing, and again for our context, knowing, as it is in the scriptures, was not just a head knowledge, but knowing meant doing.

So, if you know it, you do it.

They thought knowing the scriptures would earn them eternal life.

But, Jesus is saying, you are right in saying scriptures can lead to eternal life, because all scripture points to me.

That's what Jesus is essentially saying.

All scripture points to Jesus.

Verse 40 continues, Yet, you refuse to come to me, that you may have life.

The Jewish leaders read the scriptures, which spoke of Jesus, yet they refuse to give up the shadow for the reality of Jesus Christ being front and center in front of them.

It's like us trying to chase a rainbow, thinking that there is a pot of gold at the end.

What is a rainbow?

Not exclusively, other than, well, first, other than a promise from God, right?

It is a reflection of light from the air.

It is a reflection of light in the air.

It is just a reflection.

It's not a real thing.

And, Jesus is going, I am the word.

All Old Testament scripture points to me.

You can see Jesus all throughout Old Testament scripture, even as we've been teaching the kids the last two weeks.

The snake crusher from Genesis chapter 3.

We can see, even in the beginning of Matthew, of this weird family line that they highlight of people, of prostitutes, of crazy people who connect and point to Jesus.

So, if you're interested in, this is a side note.

If you're interested in some extra listening throughout the week, the White Horse Inn podcast, they just started this series on the women in the genealogy of Jesus.

And, they started last week, it was Tamar, incredible story, incredible discourse, if you're looking for that.

And, why these women, like Rahab, like Tamar, why they are acknowledged in the story and in the genealogy of Jesus.

It's really cool stuff, if you're interested in that.

But, Jesus is saying, I am the word.

I am what the scriptures are pointing to.

I am it.

And, yet, they refuse to come to Jesus.

Verse 41.

I do not receive glory from people, but I know that you do not have the love of God within you.

Wow.

What a claim.

Again, Jesus is talking to Pharisees, religious leaders, and he's saying, you don't have the love of God in you.

I have come, verse 43, in my Father's name, and you do not receive me.

If another comes in his own name, you will receive him.

Wow.

Who is the one who is deserving of all glory, honor, and praise?

It's Jesus.

And, yet, the Jews would not give him that honor.

Verse 45.

Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father.

There is one who accuses you, Moses, on whom you have set your hope.

For if you believe Moses, you would have believed me.

For he wrote of me.

But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my words?

This portion of text sort of does two things.

It's Jesus telling us that Moses wrote the Pentateuch.

He's saying, there is one who accuses you, Moses.

Moses, again, he's equating Moses to the law, first five books of the Bible.

He's saying, like, Moses.

It's Moses.

Those are his words.

If you believe Moses, you would believe me.

Then, Jesus is claiming here that the Jews are misinterpreting Scripture since they do not believe that Jesus is the Messiah.

They are misinterpreting Scripture because they do not understand that Jesus is God.

Moses represented the law.

And the Jews' hope was in fulfilling the law by their own works.

But if the Scriptures point to Jesus, then Moses, the law, writes about Jesus.

Moses wrote about Jesus.

And this is what Jesus is saying to these religious leaders.

Like, John the Baptist wrote, is a witness of me.

My own works are a witness of me.

The Father is a witness of me.

The Scriptures and Moses are a witness of me.

See, it's no wonder they wanted to kill him.

Like, here they are on the defense, are accusing Jesus.

Here they are saying, like, who are you?

And then Jesus goes, I've got my witnesses here.

Actually, you're the one accused.

I am not the one accused.

I will be the one who will go to die.

But even then, I'll raise again.

And you are going to have to wrestle with me.

We see in this discourse that really, Jesus was the one who was acting like the judge.

He was accusing them of missing him.

He accused them of putting their salvation in the law, not seeing Jesus as what he was, a fulfillment of the law.

John the Baptist spoke of Jesus' divinity.

Jesus' works showed his divinity.

The Father confirmed Jesus as his son.

And all scripture points to Jesus.

And so if all of these things point to Jesus, then we ought to do the same. we ought in everything that we do point to Jesus.

And again, we don't have to make it cheesy.

We don't have to make it weird.

Like, I think it's so sweet when football players after the game they're getting interviewed.

Just praise God, my Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

Like, it's really sweet.

It's really precious. they've got great hearts for it.

And I I love that they're taking that opportunity to to make it about Jesus.

But like, when you do something great at your work, you don't have to be like, praise God, Jesus, it's all him.

But in everything that we do, can people see Jesus in us?

Can in everything that we do, are we are we allowing the fruit of the Spirit to be evident in our lives?

We don't have to make it cheesy.

We don't have to make it weird.

But we should also not be ashamed to point out how Jesus is working.

We should not be ashamed to point out how Jesus is the Son of God.

Especially in this Christmas season.

We must magnify the name of Christ.

And so if you're not the type of person to when somebody says happy holidays and you Merry Christmas!

Like, you don't you don't have to be that person.

If that's not you, if that's you, great.

If not, great.

But in everything that we do, are we pointing people to Jesus?

Because Jesus is the person who is worthy of all the praise, all the honor, all the glory.

If the scriptures pointed to him.

If John the Baptist pointed to him.

If his works point to him being from God.

And if God himself said, this is my Son, then we should be doing the same.

Pointing people to Jesus.

Jesus. everything points to Jesus.

It's as simple as that.

Our lives should point people to Jesus. that's all I got.
