---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 4:21-31"
date: "2024-07-07T16:27:32.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/88932925/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fproduction%2F2024-6-7%2F382647694-48000-1-af20ebafe534e.m4a"
duration: "37:50"
scripture: "Galatians 4:21-31"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: Abraham, Sarah & Hagar. \n
guid: 99ee5229-6ccd-4ee8-bde7-9e6c79cdba4f
episode_id: 244300a8
---

## Transcription

Let's read all of Galatians 4 to start this morning and then we'll hunker down in verses 21 through 31.

And yeah, I was very quick at first to write off these last verses and then as I was doing my study I was like there is, there's a lot here so that's why we need a whiteboard.

Alright.

We could put the whole book of Genesis on this one.

This is crazy.

Look at that.

The limit is not a chest.

I've learned my evil.

We're set.

We're gonna figure out the proof of the equation.

The limit does not.

Oh is there, is there a, oh there's drawing, oh sorry.

There's writing.

Sorry we just solved some math problems the other day.

I don't know where the eraser is.

Let me just get some paper towel.

Okay so if somebody wants to start reading Galatians chapter 4 we'll read the whole chapter and then we can go from there.

I can read it.

Sweet.

So I mean that the heir as long as he is a child is no different from a slave though he is the owner of everything but he is under guardians and managers as a date set by his father.

In the same way we also, we were children, we were enslaved to the elementary principles of the world.

When the fullness of time had come God sent forth his son, born of woman, born under the law to redeem those who were under the law so that we might receive adoption as sons.

And because you are sons God has sent the spirit of his son into our hearts crying Abba father.

You are no longer a slave but a son and a big son then an heir through God.

Formerly when you did not know God you were enslaved to those that by nature are not gods.

But now that you have come to know God or rather to be known by God how can you turn back again to the weak and worthless elementary principles of the world whose slaves you want to become once more.

You observe days and months and seasons and years I am afraid I have labored it over you in vain.

Brothers I entreat you become as I am for I also have become as you were.

You did me no wrong.

You know it was because of a bodily ailment that I preached the gospel to you at first.

And though my condition was a trial to you, you did not scorn or despise me but received me as an angel of God as Christ Jesus.

What then has become of your blessedness?

For I testify to you that if possible you would have gouged out your eyes and given them to.

Have I then become your enemy by telling you the truth?

They make much of you but for no good purpose.

They want to show you out that you may make much of them.

It is also always because though it is always good to be made much of for a good purpose and not only when I am present with you my little children for whom I am again in the anguish of childbirth until Christ is born.

I wish I could be present with you now and change my tone for I am perplexed about you.

Tell me, you who desire to be under the law, do you not listen to the law?

For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by a slave woman and one by a free woman.

But the son of the slave was born according to the flesh while the son of the free woman was born through promise.

Now this may be interpreted allegorically.

These women are two covenants.

One is from Mount Sinai bearing children for slavery.

She is Hagar.

Now Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia.

She corresponds to the present Jerusalem for she is in slavery with her children.

But the Jerusalem above is free and she is our mother for it is written rejoice O barren and who does not bear, break forth and cry aloud, you who are not in labor.

For the children of the desolate one will be more than those of the one who has a husband.

Now you brothers like Isaac are children of promise.

But just as that time who was born according to the flesh persecuted him who was born according to the spirit, so also is it now.

But what does the scripture say?

Cast out the slave woman and her son for the son of the slave woman shall not inherit with the son of the free woman.

So brothers we are not children of the slave but of the free woman.

Awesome, thank you.

So Paul is kind of ending his argument here bringing the Galatians back yet again to Abraham and this whole story that he's calling back to it's from Genesis 16 to 21 about Abraham's wife, Sarah and her slave woman Hagar and Abraham's son with Hagar which is Ishmael and then also Abraham's son with Sarah which is Isaac.

So if you're unfamiliar with the story I'll give you a quick summary.

So God tells Abraham he's going to have a son again all the blessings all the promises and as many stars in the sky and Abraham receives this promise when he's in his 60s or 70s and then he gets God tells Abraham and Sarah that they will have a child and she's 75 years old they both are 75 years old when they receive this promise that they will have a child.

And of course about 10 years goes by and they're finally like okay is this promise ever going to come to pass and then they become impatient and so Sarah has a great idea hey how about you marry my slave Hagar sleep with her and maybe that's how God's promise is to be.

And so then Abraham says sure and sleeps with Hagar they have a child his name is Ishmael and then Sarah hates Hagar and Ishmael.

Then finally when Sarah turns 100 years old she has her son Isaac and then three years goes by and there's a little quarrel which again in this timeline Isaac is a teenager so he's probably about 17 years old and then Isaac is about three years old and the 17 year old is messing with and being mean to the three year old and Sarah's had enough so then Sarah goes to Abraham and says hey you need to kick out Hagar and Ishmael and then God approves of this message and then kicks out Hagar and Ishmael and that's the story that Paul is pulling from here to give us some serious spiritual knowledge about the spiritual truths and drive home this point of the old law of the mosaic law of all the laws that the Israelites were supposed to follow and then the freedom that they're missing out on in Christ and so it feels like especially as we've been going verse by verse through the book of Galatians that it has been like okay we get it Paul but this is as I was doing my study I was like this is nuts.

Okay verse 22 through 23.

For it is written that Abraham had two sons one by a slave woman one by a free woman but the son of the slave was born according to the flesh while the son of the free woman was born through promise.

Okay so we read this Galatians 4 chapter let's get some context I'm going to read Genesis 21 verses 1 through 12 so if you want to go there and read along you can read that and then we're going to pull from that to and kind of not compare and contrast but we're going to see what Paul was pulling at from this passage in Genesis and just really see the relationship between the differences between Hagar and Sarah as well as Ishmael and Isaac and how they each represent both the old covenant and new covenant and how all of this plays together so let's go to Genesis 21 verses 1 through 12.

The Lord visited Sarah as he had said and the Lord did to Sarah as he promised and Sarah conceived and bore Abraham a son in his old age at the time of which God had spoken to him.

Abraham called the name of his son who was born to him whom Sarah bore him Isaac and Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old as God had commanded him.

Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born to him and Sarah said God has made laughter for me everyone who hears will laugh over me and she said who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children yet I have born him a son in his old age and the child grew and was weaned and Abraham made a great feast on the day that Isaac was weaned but Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian whom she had born to Abraham laughing so she said to Abraham cast out the slave woman with her son for the son of the slave woman shall not be heir with my son Isaac and the thing that was and the thing that was very displeasing to Abraham on account of his son but God said to Abraham be not displeased because of the boy and because of your slave woman whatever Sarah says to you do as she tells you for through Isaac shall your offspring be named.

Okay this is where we turn to the whiteboard okay so let's if I can pop the top off of this guy there we go okay so let's get the old covenant over here and the new covenant over here and so under the old covenant we have the law right that's all 613 of the old law then under the new covenant we have the covenant of grace so we have grace not just here in the flesh but through Jesus under the law we have Hagar the slave there's a lot here this is why we need this and it just it's easier to anyways just just trust me Sarah the free right she was not a slave she was Hagar's or she was Abraham's true wife then we have Ishmael which who was conceived by the flesh Isaac conceived by the flesh and Hagar was the slave of Abraham.

So we by the spirit because it is only by God you have a child at 100.

The old covenant represents earthly Jerusalem in bondage and the old covenant represents the child of God.

So we have the new covenant which represents heavenly Jerusalem which is free.

Okay so the new covenant is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant which is the new covenant through Abraham who represents faith, Sarah who represents grace, Isaac is a product of grace and faith just as every Christian now is grace and faith falling under the new covenant.

Isaac brought joy.

Isaac as we read in Genesis, Isaac means laughter and he brought much joy to his century old parents.

For us salvation is an experience of joy not only to the believer but also to those around them as well.

When one enters the kingdom of God all of heaven rejoices as one enters the kingdom of God here we can celebrate there is joy, amazing.

Isaac he grew and he was weaned we read that in Genesis 21 so salvation is just the beginning it's not the ending.

After we are born we must grow and along with maturity comes weaning so we must lay aside the childish things and how easy is it to hold on to the toys of our early Christian life and our early Christian days and fail to lay hold of the tools of the mature believer.

The child does not enjoy being weaned but he can never become a man until that happens.

Let me read Psalm 131, oh Lord my heart is not lifted up, my eyes are not raised too high, I do not occupy myself with things too great and too marvelous for me but I have calmed and quieted my soul like a weaned child with its mother like a weaned child is my soul within me.

Oh Israel hope in the Lord from this time forth forevermore.

Isaac was persecuted right we see that in Genesis 21 persecuted might be a little strong but whatever was happening was not cool with Mama Sarah and so Ishmael the flesh caused problems for Isaac just as our old nature causes problems for us.

We'll get into this more in Galatians chapter 5.

So Ishmael created no problems in the home until Isaac was born just as our old nature creates no problems for us until the new nature in Christ enters in.

In Abraham's home we see the same conflict that we Christians face today.

We see law versus grace, we see Hagar versus Sarah, we see law versus grace and we see flesh versus spirit.

So we see the significance of the sons, the flesh versus spirit and now Paul is going to turn to the wives, law versus grace.

The believer is not under law but is under the loving freedom that comes through God's grace.

So Hagar was Abraham's second wife and Hagar did not be or sorry God did not begin with Hagar, he began with Sarah right.

Think God sorry Abraham married Sarah first, that's who the promise was with first.

So God began with grace, God began with grace all the way back in the garden right.

He provided a coat of skin after Adam and Eve fell and a covering after the fall and he also promised a snake crusher.

So instead of leading with the law God led with grace.

God began with grace in the covenant with Abraham.

If we remember Genesis 15 in the weird ceremony where the animals are cut in half and Abraham is asleep and he is in a coma and then God through a flame passes through the animals signifying the covenant promise was with God and Abraham but only God walked through, only God was on the hook for the covenant, only God was the one who if he failed would die and of course he was saved.

God does not fail, he knew Adam or Abraham would and so Abraham is there in a deep sleep and God fulfills this covenant promise, creates this covenant promise with Abraham.

He began with grace, our God is a God of grace first.

Hagar was Abraham's second wife not of grace.

Hagar was a slave and we saw multiple times in this Galatian passage Hagar is referred to as the slave woman and Sarah is the free woman.

Sarah's position is out of her liberty whereas even though Hagar was married to Abraham she was still a slave just as the mosaic law was given as a mirror to show us our need for, show us our sin but also show us our need for a savior until Christ came.

The law was never meant to be forever, certain parts of the law yes but not the whole law.

Hagar was a slave, the law we became slaves under the law, we became indebted to the law.

Hagar was a slave, Hagar was never meant to bear a child.

Abraham's marriage to Hagar was outside of the will of God.

The marriage was the result of Sarah and Abraham's unbelief and impatience.

Hagar was trying to do what only Sarah could do and it failed.

The law cannot give life or righteousness or the gift of the spirit and Paul is trying to do what only Sarah could or the gift of the spirit and Paul is trying to communicate that the Judaizers were trying to make Hagar a mother again.

They were trying to make Hagar in the blessing, in the promise but she is not in the promise.

She was never meant to bear a child and no amount of religion or legislation can lead a dead sinner to life.

Only Jesus Christ can through the gospel.

Hagar is outside of that and Hagar was cast out.

So Sarah gave the order to cast out the slave woman and her son and God approved it.

It is impossible for the law and grace, flesh and the spirit to compromise and stay together.

It is impossible and we have to be careful now, just as Paul is now saying, it is impossible to mix law and grace.

It is impossible to mix faith and works, God's gift of righteousness and man's attempts to earn righteousness.

We cannot mix those two.

We either accept the free gift of righteousness through by grace through faith or we can live under the delusion that we can earn our righteousness through our good works, which is so against scripture, it is not even funny.

Hagar was not married again.

What does he mean?

God never gave the law to any other nation or person, including his church, including us.

Paul is making the point that the Judaizers are trying to impose the law on the Galatian Christians and to do that is to oppose the very plan of God.

The law was for a certain time and a certain purpose and Hagar, the old law, the old covenant is not to be married again.

From our perspective, it might seem like God is cruel for sending out Hagar and for sending out Abraham's son, issuing the HTML.

Abraham's oldest son, who he loved very much, but it was the only solution to the problem.

And in a deeper sense, think of what it cost God when he gave his son to bear the curse of the law and to set us free.

Abraham's broken heart meant Isaac's liberty.

God giving of his son means our liberty in Jesus.

A lot we just went over there.

Kind of confusing, but also kind of makes sense.

But let me take us back one more time.

So we have the old covenant versus the new covenant.

We have the covenant that was established through law, through rules, through all of the laws that were given to Israel versus the grace that was given to, in context, Abraham and Sarah.

And the grace that was given to Abraham through the birth of their son, Isaac.

And for us, we have grace through Jesus.

We have the old covenant, which represented Hagar, the slave, versus Sarah, the free woman.

We have Ishmael, who was conceived by the flesh.

We have Isaac, who was conceived through the miraculous of Jesus working in Sarah and Abraham's behalf.

Then we have earthly Jerusalem in bondage and heavenly Jerusalem, which is free.

Let me read this passage again, now that we've kind of digested a lot of it in Galatians, just so we can see it again after having this understanding.

Read through it one more time and we'll hopefully make a little more sense of this.

Tell me, this is verse 21, Galatians 4.

Tell me, you who desire to be under the law, do you not listen to the law?

For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by a slave woman, one by a free woman.

But the son of the slave was born according to the flesh, while the son of the free woman was born through promise.

Now, this may be interpreted allegorically.

These women are two covenants.

One is from Mount Sinai, bearing children for slavery.

She is Hagar.

Now, Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia.

She corresponds to the present Jerusalem, for she is in slavery with her children.

But the Jerusalem above is free, and she is our mother.

For it is written, rejoice, O barren one, who does not bear, break forth and cry aloud, you who are not in labor.

For the children of the desolate one will be more than those of the one who has a husband.

Now, you brothers, like Isaac, are children of promise.

But just as at that time, he who was born according to the flesh persecuted him, who was born according to the spirit.

So also, it is now.

But what does the scripture say?

Cast out the slave woman and her son, for the son of the slave woman shall not inherit with the son of the free woman.

So brothers, we are not children of the slave, but of the free woman.

Jumping back down to verse 30 and 31.

We Christians, like Isaac, are the children of promise by grace.

The covenant of grace, pictured again by Sarah, is our spiritual mother.

The law and the old nature, Hagar and Ishmael, want to persecute us and bring us into bondage.

So the question is, how do we solve this problem?

We can try to change them and this will fail, for we cannot change the law and we cannot change our old nature.

John 3 says, that which is born of the flesh is flesh.

And we might add, it will always be flesh.

And we will always be born of the flesh.

And we will always be born of the flesh.

God did not try to change Ishmael and Hagar, either by force or by education, and neither can you and I change the old nature and the law.

So if we can't change it, we could try to compromise.

We could find a middle ground, right?

But clearly that did not work in Abraham's home, as we read.

He cast them out and it will not work in our lives either.

And Paul is writing to this Galatian church, these churches in Galatia, who were trying to live in compromise.

They were trying to live in the freedom of Christ, while also adhering to Old Testament law.

But it was only leading them to gradual bondage.

It was only leading them further down the wrong path.

And false teachers today will tell us, don't abandon Christ, simply move into a deeper Christian life by practicing the law along with your faith in Christ.

Do more.

You just need to attain more.

You just need to do all of these things more.

Invite Hagar and Ishmael back into your home.

But this is the path back into slavery.

Earlier in the chapter, as we just read, Galatians 4 and 9, how can you turn back again to the weak and worthless elementary principles of the world, whose slaves you want to be once more?

Paul is drilling down this point to the Galatian church.

Don't make the slave, don't become a slave again to the law that's already been paid for through Jesus.

So what's our only response?

We must cast them out.

This is what we are supposed to do.

First, Paul applied this to the nation of Israel, as we read in verse 25 to 27.

Then he applied it to the individual Christian.

The nation of Israel has been in bondage under the law, but this was a temporary thing, preparing them for the coming of Christ.

But clearly they still held on to the law because they killed Jesus.

And so now that Christ has come, the law has to go.

Jesus, like Isaac, was a child of the promise born by the power of God.

Once Jesus had come and died for all people, the law stayed buried in Israel.

And he died in the grave.

And what rose?

Jesus, this new covenant that is by his body and his blood.

But we have this problem that we can fall into legalistic ways.

What is legalism?

Legalism does not mean the setting of spiritual standards.

Legalism is worshipping these standards and thinking we are spiritual because we can obey these standards.

That's legalism.

Legalism is not the setting of spiritual standards.

There are standards.

God has set standards for us.

Legalism is worshipping the standard and then thinking of your spell of spiritual because you met a standard.

I don't smoke, I don't drink, and I don't hang out with those that do, whatever that saying is.

And all we have to do is look at the Pharisees who held a standard, who had a standard and made a big deal out of the standard and then killed Jesus.

So just because you have a standard, you have to be able to do that.

And so that standards you can still do on spiritual things.

So what's the secret to cracking the code that is before us?

How do we continually cast out Hagar and Ishmael again?

How do we cast out the ways of the flesh?

How do we instead of the flesh focus on the spirit?

And of course that is the answer, the Holy Spirit.

And Paul is about to turn this book into a lot more practical, spiritual, how do we actually apply this through the power of the Spirit?

How do we walk with the Spirit as Paul will say?

How do we live in the Spirit?

How do we walk in freedom versus walking in the flesh and living in the law?

So stay tuned for next week.

But all that to say, Paul is, Paul pulled on this crazy family story.

He was a Christian who was a Christian, a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian.

He was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian who was a Christian
