---
layout: sermon
title: Galatians 2:11-21
date: 2024-05-05T15:56:59.000Z
category: sermon
audio_url: https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/86378921/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-4-6%2F91557108-b29e-3b84-e7c7-592107ce2cf7.m4a
duration: 27:18
scripture: Galatians 2:11-21
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: "May 5, 2024 - Galatians 2:11-21"
guid: dbe9d83f-a049-4ab5-a127-d4b19e70ab14
episode_id: 9052c215
---


## Transcription

Alright, so let's catch up.

We are, we'll start on verse 11 of chapter 2, Galatians, and of course Paul is riding to the region of Galatia, to the churches there, and Paul is riding very briefly and very passionately about really the gospel, and something that I don't think we hit on then, but I think like part of the role of the church is, I believe is, and again this is part, but part of our role is to proclaim the gospel and also to protect the gospel, and what Paul is doing here is protecting the gospel in that he's calling out Christians, he's calling out churches who are adding onto or who are diluting the message of the gospel.

That's how we protect the gospel.

We don't need to protect Jesus.

He's perfect, he is in control, he's all things, but Christ has given us this message of his life, of the gospel, the good news, and it's our job first to proclaim it, proclaim it boldly, and that's what we do as we gather and as you meet people throughout your life, we proclaim the gospel, and also we protect the gospel, and protection looks like making sure nothing else dilutes this message, and so that's what Paul is doing, right?

So he's riding back to protect the gospel, protect it from dilution, protect it from addition, and so Paul is calling out these churches, and he is, last week we talked about him building his defense for the gospel, he gave the example of Titus, who was a living example of how the gospel was not just for the Jew but for the Gentile, how the apostles accepted his, the gospel that Paul was preaching, they also accepted Titus, and so now we see, Paul is going to describe an interaction between him and Peter, and Paul is going to show us how he was protecting the gospel through, and that's what we'll get to, and then anyways, my Bible section is this portion as Paul poses Cephas, which the Cephas is Peter, Peter is Cephas, he just calls him Cephas, I don't know if that was like, he was like, like when I was in trouble as a kid, my mom and dad would always say Nathaniel, like I don't know if that was like, Cephas was the equivalent of Nathaniel for this circumstance, but anyways, let's read, why don't we just read all of Galatians, and then we will break down these last ten or so verses, so if somebody wants to read Galatians 2.

I got it.

Sweet.

Hello internet.

Sorry, just a, I know.

Sorry.

Back up.

And after 14 years, I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas to take Titus along with me.

I went up because of a revelation set before them, though privately before those who seemed influential, the gospel that I proclaimed among the Gentiles in order to make sure it was not running or had not run in vain, but even Titus who was with me was not forced to be circumcised, though he was a Greek, that because of false brothers secretly brought in who slipped in to spy out our freedom that we have in Christ Jesus so that they may bring us into slavery, to them we did not yield in submission even for a moment so that the truth of the gospel might be preserved for you.

And from those who seem to be influential, what they were makes no difference to me, God shows no partiality, those I say who seemed influential adding nothing to me.

On the contrary, when they saw that I had been entrusted with the gospel to the uncircumcised, just as Peter had been entrusted with the gospel to the circumcised, for he who worked through Peter for his apostolic ministry to the circumcised worked also through me for mine to the Gentiles.

And when James and Cephas and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that was given to me, they gave the right hand of fellowship to Barnabas and me that we should go to the Gentiles and they to the circumcised.

Only they asked us to remember the poor, the very thing I was eager to do.

But when Cephas came to Antioch, I posed him to his face because he stood condemned.

For before certain men came from James, he was eating with the Gentiles, but when they came he drew back and separated himself fearing the circumcision party.

And the rest of the Jews acted hypocritically along with him so that even Barnabas was led astray by their hypocrisy.

But when I saw that their conduct was not in step with the truth of the gospel, I said to Cephas before them all, if you, though a Jew, live like a Gentile and not like a Jew, how can you force the Gentiles to live like Jews?

We ourselves are Jews by birth and not Gentile sinners, yet we know that a person is not justified by works of the law, but through faith in Jesus Christ.

So we also have to believe in Jesus Christ in order to be crucified by faith in Christ and not by works of the law, because by works of the law no one will be justified.

But if in our endeavor to be justified in Christ we too were found to be sinners, is Christ then a servant of sin?

Certainly not.

For if I rebuild what I tore down, I prove myself to be a transgressor, for through the law I died to the law so that I might live to God.

I have been crucified with Christ, it is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me.

And the life I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.

I do not know if I had the grace of God, for if righteousness were through the law, then Christ died for no purpose.

So at the very beginning of this section in verse 11, I couldn't help but notice Peter's actions resemble his actions to the last moments, the last days of his life with Jesus.

So Peter is there and Peter at the time was eating with Gentiles.

He had this revelation, I believe it is in Acts chapter 9 or chapter 10, he has this revelation from God, it is in a dream and he is eating unclean food and God essentially goes in the dream and in the dream is like, hey what I have deemed clean, it is clean, you don't have to worry about this anymore.

And so he was convinced that the gospel message was also not just for the Jew, but for the Gentile, because the things that the law which separated them was fulfilled through Jesus.

And then we see he describes there, but when they arrived he began to draw back and separate himself from the Gentiles because he was afraid of those who belonged to the circumcision, some translations say party or group, and the other Jews joined him in hypocrisy so that their hypocrisy, even Barnabas was led astray.

And it reminds me of him, Jesus told him, hey you are going to betray me.

And then those three times Peter betrays Jesus and then of course the rooster crows and he feels terrible about it, and yet we see him again go from confident, no this is the way, the gospel is for the Jew and the Gentile, and the law has been accomplished through Jesus, we see that he is good, and then the moment these, whether it be influential people or more people come, he backs down.

And in commentary that I will reference and quote a few times, because I just, he just put it greatly, I will read a quote for these verses here 11-13, and he says, often Christians fail to stand for the truth of the gospel because they do not want to lose the approval of the wealthy or powerful.

In other circumstances we do not want to disrupt relationships, so we compromise on the gospel instead of confronting friends or family.

Paul's confrontation of Peter tells us that no matter who the person is, friend, family or foe, and no matter how influential one might be, our allegiance must always be to Christ and his gospel.

And I just love the way that this man, Fesco, that's his last name, the way he put that, it's just, yeah, and it is so hard to be like Paul in this circumstance and to not be Peter in this circumstance where the popular position was to side with the Jews and not with the Gentiles, but Peter obviously had influence, and so then all of these other Jews start to join him, and even like Barnabas, who was like Paul's homie, like Paul's ride or die, and Barnabas was led astray, and so Paul is like, dude, what's going on?

Then we get to verse 14-15, and Paul addresses this sort of double standard and the weight of the law.

When I saw they were not acting in line with the truth of the gospel, I said to see this in front of them all, you are a Jew, yet you live like a Gentile and not like a Jew.

He's going like, hey, I see you, you cannot fulfill the law, yet you're acting like a Jew who's under the law, and so how is it then that you are forcing these Gentiles to follow Jewish customs?

How can you force these people who are not us to follow something that you cannot follow yourself?

And so he's calling out Paul is calling out one, the hypocrisy of Peter, but also he's calling out the weight of the law that you cannot fulfill it even if you've tried and you have tried.

We who are Jews by birth and not sinful Gentiles know that a person is not justified by the works of the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ.

And so he's just calling him out going like, dude, you cannot do this.

This is why we are a person is not justified by the works of the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ.

Because if we were if we tried to earn our justification by the law, then one, we couldn't earn it.

And two, then that makes Jesus's sacrifice pointless.

Then so we too, this is a verse continuing in verse 16.

So we too have put our faith in Christ Jesus that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by the works of the law because of the works of the law, no one will be justified.

Then verse 17, but if in seeking to be justified in Christ, we find ourselves also among the sinners, that is those who were uncircumcised when he says sinners there, he's talking about circumcision, circumcision verse uncircumcised, right, because that would have been a sign of the adherence to the law.

Does that mean that Christ promotes sin?

Absolutely not.

If I rebuild what I destroyed, then I would really be a law breaker.

So sinning in reference to circumcision, you cannot both hold on to circumcision and to Christ is what Paul is saying.

You must let go of one and adopt the other.

So that's why Paul is saying I destroyed my former life in Judaism.

I destroyed my life of trying to be a Pharisee.

I destroyed my life of trying to adhere to the law.

And if you would go back to that life under the law, he would be a law breaker.

He would be it would be he would be cursed.

And why?

Verse 19, because the law demands absolute perfect obedience and brings a curse on the one who tries to be justified, who tries to be justified by Christ.

Christ came on behalf of sinners such as Paul and the Gentiles.

And Jesus rendered his perfect obedience to the law, but never suffered its curse on behalf of the people of God, which is why Paul in verse 20 says, I have been crucified with Christ.

It is no longer I who live, but Christ lives in me.

The life I now live in the body, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.

So by faith, believers are united to Christ.

So everything that belongs to Christ is transferred to the believer and everything that belonged to the believer is transferred to Christ.

In this regard, the death of Christ is crucifixion becomes the death of the believer.

Therefore, through the death of Christ, the believer is freed from the demands of the curse of the law.

So Paul says that he was crucified with Christ.

But notice that Paul goes on to say that Christ now lives in him.

It was the indwelling power of the Holy Spirit that enabled Paul to live by faith in Christ, not his own efforts to earn justification by obedience.

So it is the spirit inside of us that allows us to to be justified by believing in Christ.

And Paul drives this point home in verse 21 where he says, I do not set aside the grace of God, for if righteousness could be gained through the law, Christ died for nothing.

If the believer's justification is based on the work of Christ and the obedience of the believer, then Christ came in vain.

Those false teachers promoting this heresy, again saying that it was Jesus plus circumcision or Jesus plus obedience to the law.

Those false teachers promoting this heresy were basically saying that the work of Christ is insufficient to save and requires more.

The addition of the believer's obedience.

And so if they are correct, then Christ did not secure salvation for anyone, but only the possibility or opportunity for salvation to those willing to complete their salvation with good works.

That's why Paul calls the Galatians, the Galatian heresy, a false gospel, because it's in addition to the works of Christ, which if you add to the works of Christ, then the works of Christ are pointless.

Because Christ did not come to give people the possibility or the chance of salvation, he came to save his people from the wrath of God, actually, finally, completely, and eternally.

Signed, sealed, delivered, it's yours.

That is the work of Christ.

It is not the work of Christ plus what I do.

It is not the work of Christ plus what my family has done.

It is not the work of Christ plus whatever you think it is the work of Christ.

Just that is our justification.

And so, like, I love our it's kind of crazy how our cataclysm each week.

They're kind of lining up.

Will God allow our disobedience and idolatry to go unpunished?

No, every sin is against the sovereignty, holiness and goodness of God and against his righteous law.

And God is righteously angry with our sins and will punish them in his just judgment, both in life and in the life to come.

And we, as Paul so eloquently stated, since we have been crucified with Christ, it is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me.

So my sins, my debt that was was was placed on Christ and Christ's perfection was placed on me.

You and I are the righteousness of Christ of God.

Sorry, you and I are the righteousness of God through Christ Jesus and in Christ Jesus.

And it is not the works of the law.

It is not the works that you and I attain today that save us.

It is only Jesus Christ.

His perfection makes us perfect.

Period.

And that is good news because we still fall short of the law.

Do we need to throw away the law?

No, because our law, the law shows us our need for Jesus and his life and his death and his resurrection.

If we don't see the weight of the law, if we don't see how we have fallen short of God, then why on earth would we praise Jesus?

Why on earth would we celebrate his life, death and resurrection if we could earn it ourselves?

We wouldn't need Christ.

We wouldn't need Christ.

And one of the reasons us as a church, I wanted to lead us through this is because we can miss this.

We can miss, we can miss the simplicity of the gospel.

Some of us in prior churches, in prior experiences, may have thought that what I needed to be saved was not just the works of Christ and me believing in Christ.

But that I needed to believe in Christ and do these other things.

That is not the gospel.

Should we be like Jesus?

Should we follow in his example?

Yes, Jesus said it himself.

But we do not do those things to try and earn our place in the kingdom of God.

We love because he first loved us.

And it is our opportunity from a place of accepting and receiving that free gift of salvation.

Understanding that I haven't earned this.

And now, because of that, and again, we'll get into this, especially when we get to the very end, right?

The fruit of the Spirit.

That's in Galatians, the end of Galatians.

Love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith, gentleness, self-control.

All those things are the fruit of the Spirit at work in our lives.

Again, these are things that we cannot attain in and of ourselves.

But it is through the work of the Spirit in us that we show and show the fruit of the Spirit in our lives.

But as I said a few weeks ago, the fruit of the Spirit is different than the fruit of the gospel.

The fruit of the gospel, the goodness of the gospel, the fruit of the gospel in our lives should be praise, adoration, thanksgiving, and worship to God.

Which then builds the fruit of the Spirit.

And Paul is not just proclaiming what the gospel message is here, but he's also going, Hey, I'm going to protect it by calling it out in somebody that I love and somebody that is a beneficiary of the gospel as well.

But who I want to call out because his actions were leading to others following a false gospel.

And we don't need to go out and the application of this message is not to go to Facebook or Instagram and post, You're going to a false church.

That's not what this is about.

That's why you're recorded.

Yes, that's why I record it.

Exactly.

No, but the point is for us to be sure that we are standing on the gospel.

That our faith is rooted in the gospel.

It starts with you and I understanding what the gospel is and what the gospel isn't.

The gospel has nothing to do with what has nothing to do with you other than accepting and receiving.

And I sound like a broken record and I hope I do.

Because this is what is so important that we understand the basics and the essentials for our faith.

And if we don't.

Then of course we will try to earn it.

Then of course we will be swayed by the teachings of whoever because it sounds good because it makes us feel good.

But if we understand what the gospel really is and how we have nothing to do with it.

Then you and I can rest in that our faith is sure.

And our faith is eternal.

And our faith is an arisen Savior.

Yeah, that's.

That's that.

The gospel.

I've been crucified with Christ.

And I no longer live.

But Christ lives in me.

The life I now live in the body.

I live by faith in the Son of God.

Loved me and gave himself for me.

I do not set aside the grace of God.

For righteousness could be gained through the law.

Christ died for nothing.

Let us be people.

We do not throw aside.

The grace of God.

Because we're so busy trying to earn the love of God.

I live by faith in the Son of God who loved me and gave himself for me.

Jesus gave himself for you and for me.

And that is some good news.

Any questions or things?
