---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 3:1-5"
date: "2024-05-12T16:53:54.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/86639262/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fproduction%2F2024-4-12%2F377361478-48000-1-f0b3e625c888d.m4a"
duration: "22:10"
scripture: "Galatians 3:1-5"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: Justification, Sanctification & The Holy Spirit\n
guid: b2cb950a-2876-44d8-80b7-89be1efd01d7
episode_id: 8813fe6d
---

## Transcription

Amen.

Amen.

Fun fact, Mother's Day started with a salad.

Yeah.

I have a lot of extra time on my hands and so I end up reading articles and Kayla was laughing at me this morning about that.

But yeah, I started in Philadelphia, 1900s.

This woman in her tea room was trying to up sales and so she created a Mother's Day salad and then years go by and she continues this tradition and she sees profits increase and then other businesses start to catch on and then it becomes this commercialized holiday and that we celebrate now today and she tried everything in her power to stop this and because she just wanted it for herself, but the whole world and Hallmark's wanted Mother's Day.

And so here we are and happy Mother's Day and I hope you have a salad today.

In honor of Yes, who started and killed tried to but no in all seriousness.

Thank you moms for everything you do and yes, we're incredibly grateful for mothers.

We're going to read we're going to read starting at chapter 2 of Galatians verse 15 and then we'll read through chapter 3 verse 5.

So we're there's a lot in chapter 3, especially the first five verses.

That will get to today.

And then we'll get through a big chunk of chapter 3 next week.

And we'll go back and look at father Abraham and his many sons.

But yeah, let's start in chapter 2 verse 15 and then we'll read all the way through chapter 3 verse 5 whoever wants to read.

I'll read chapter 2 15.

Yep.

And then 35.

Yep.

We who are Jews by birth and not sinful Gentiles know that a person is not justified by the works of the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ.

So we too have put our faith in Christ Jesus that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by the works of the law because by the works of the law, no one will be justified.

But if in seeking to be justified in Christ we Jews find ourselves also among the sinners doesn't that mean that Christ promotes sin?

Absolutely not.

If I rebuild what I destroyed then I really would be a lawbreaker.

For though the law I died to the law for through the law.

I died to the law so that I might live for God.

I've been crucified with Christ and I no longer live but Christ lives in me.

The life I now live in the body.

I live by faith in the Son of God who loved me and gave himself for me.

I do not set aside the grace of God for if righteousness could be gained through the law Christ died for nothing.

You foolish Galatians who is bewitched you before your very eyes.

Jesus Christ was clearly portrayed as crucified.

I would like to learn just one thing from you.

Did you receive the spirit by the works of the law or by believing what you heard?

Are you so foolish after beginning by means of the spirit?

Are you now trying to finish by means of the flesh?

Have you experienced so much in vain if it really wasn't vain?

So again, I ask does God give you his spirit and work miracles among you by the works of the law or by your believing what you heard?

There it is.

Okay, so Paul is continuing to break down the Galatian region of churches breaking down their logic and is now questioning them asking sort of two big questions.

How do you get started in Christ is one question and how was one sustained in Christ?

It's kind of the two questions he's asking and we would sort of categorize those questions as justification and sanctification.

So how was one justified and how was one sanctified and our New City Catechism says justification means are declared righteousness before God made possible by Christ's death and resurrection for us.

That's justification means are declared righteousness before God made possible by Christ's death and resurrection for us sanctification means are gradual growing righteousness made possible by the spirits work in us notice both of these things are made possible by God not made possible by us.

Our justification is made possible by Christ death and resurrection and our sanctification is made possible by the spirits work in us.

So Paul is asking does our right standing before God depend on the work of Christ crucified or does it depend on us and we all know the answer to this question is it's Christ and when we believe in our hearts and confess with our mouth that Jesus is Lord the Holy Spirit dwells within us.

So did you receive the Holy Spirit by works of the law?

No by faith in Jesus Christ and I want to just take a quick moment and kind of like sidebar here and talk about because it's pretty common in Charismatic and Pentecostal churches to teach about the baptism of the Holy Spirit.

So you might have heard of this topic before if not, I'll kind of break it down, but it's a separate baptism.

That is not baptism with water which will get into clear definition after in a second, but this is a separate baptism and the scriptural basis for this is usually in Acts 19 and if I could sum up Acts 19 Paul is on his way.

He meets these believers and Paul asked them if they have received the Holy Spirit and then they say no and we've never even heard of this Holy Spirit.

Then Paul asks were you baptized and they say yes, it was John's baptism.

And so then what they do is Paul they essentially are are rebaptized laid hands on and they receive the Spirit and the fruit of that is they begin speaking in tongues.

Okay, so that's kind of the if you want to go back and read that story Acts 19.

It's all right there for you, but it's pretty clear from that passage that it was not our baptism.

If you haven't baptized you were probably baptized in the name of the Father Son, Holy Spirit boom dunked raised up and so clearly there's two separate baptisms at this time and not only that but baptism is the washing with water in the name of the Father the Son and the Holy Spirit and it signifies and seals our adoption into Christ our cleansing from sin and our commitment to belong to the Lord into his church.

It is a sign and a seal.

It is not salvation, which is what we believe.

We believe that the Holy Spirit is God co-eternal with the Father and the Son and that God grants him irrevocably to all who believe.

Okay, so that's the Holy Spirit.

It comes it comes to you once you believe and so how can you already get something in baptism that you already have?

It's it's almost the same like argument that Paul is making that's confusing.

It's like trying to earn your salvation through works, especially when we go back to Acts 19 and see that the fruit of the baptism was speaking in tongues.

So what happens if you go through this baptism of the Holy Spirit and you don't speak in tongues then it's like that that's pretty harmful, right?

Then you start to question.

Okay, did did it not happen?

Then do I need to do it again?

Is there something else I need to do?

Let's go back to justification and sanctification both two things that happen not by us but by God's work for us, right?

So it's it's it contradicts very basic and core doctrine and it's hurtful to those who are saved and have the Spirit but maybe don't have the gift of tongues.

We can talk more about this later, but let's carry on.

I just want to address that because anyways, so clearly this was an in Acts 19.

It's talking about a difference of baptism.

John's baptism was preparing the way for Jesus.

Our baptism is a sign in a seal of what Jesus has done for us very different.

Let's carry on Paul asked have you been given the Spirit by works or by Christ in Romans Paul puts it this way.

This is Romans 3 by the deeds of the law.

No flesh will be justified in his that's capital H in God's sight for by the law is a knowledge of sin because of the law because of Mosaic Because of the Ten Commandments we see our sin the law shows us our sin and it is not our ticket to the Holy Spirit.

The Spirit comes through the gospel through hearing and receiving Jesus as Lord and Savior.

Let's look to the Old Testament and see what God has promised to the prophet Ezekiel in chapter 36 26 through 27 and I will give you a new heart.

This is God telling the prophet.

I will give you a new heart and a new spirit.

I will put within you and I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a heart of flesh and I will put my spirit within you and cause you to walk in my statutes and be careful to obey my rules.

The outpouring of the Holy Spirit is a divine gift of God's mercy and something that his people have earned the right to receive through their obedience.

Again, I'll read that last part of the verse.

I will put my spirit within you and cause you again.

This is God's work in us the fruit of the Spirit as Paul will later talk about in Galatians and cause you to walk in my statutes and be careful to obey my rules.

Paul continues in verse 3.

Are you so foolish having begun by the Spirit?

Are you not being perfected by the flesh?

So the work of Christ that was started in you is now up to you like the work that Christ started.

He's now passing off to you.

You are being perfected by your actions now like this is so silly.

This is what Paul is saying.

This is so silly that you think that the gospel that God started that God finished and he's as we will talk about next week in Abraham a covenant that God made with himself and at and Abraham but God fulfilled for himself.

He was the only one who was put on the line Genesis 15 will get there next week, which is great and God started it will he not complete it, right?

And Paul will write that in Philippians, right?

He who began a good work and you will bring it on to completion.

And so the work that Christ started in you it's not up to us.

Christ will complete it in us through us by the power of the Holy Spirit.

And this is where a proper view of self and a proper view of sanctification are important.

Again sanctification means are gradual growing righteousness made possible by the Spirit's work in us.

It is the work of the Holy Spirit in you that you are becoming more like Christ.

It is the Holy Spirit in you that produces the fruit of the Spirit as the writer of the Hebrew said the author and finisher of our faith.

Also, and then of course already read it.

He who began a good work and you will bring it on to completion.

If he started it, he's going to finish it.

Paul also says in Philippians that we must work out our salvation with fear and trembling or James says faith without works is dead.

These aren't opposing teaching.

We just can't mix up the order.

We need to know that this process is the Spirit at work within us and not us proving ourselves to God or others.

Let me say that again because I need to be reminded of this all the time.

This process is the Spirit at work within us not us proving ourselves to God or to others.

Verse 4 and 5.

Did you suffer so many things in vain?

If indeed it was in vain does he who supplies the Spirit to you and works miracles among you do so by works of the law or by hearing with faith?

The early church and especially this church in Galatia would have been familiar with persecution.

So Paul is speaking to this persecution for their faith and devotion to Christ saying did you do that for your gospel or for the gospel?

To suffer for the gospel is a good thing, but to suffer for a false gospel is to suffer in vain and your gospel their gospel is not the gospel.

Is what Paul is saying.

And to suffer for the gospel is a very well good and righteous thing, but to suffer for a false gospel is to suffer in vain.

So he's saying the persecution that you've gone through you're trying to prove this point about circumcision about being in right standing with with the law like you trying to prove that that that's already been done.

So like why are you being persecuted then?

It's not for that.

It is for the gospel.

Just really great stuff.

Here's a quote from Martin Luther to wrap this whole thing in a nice pretty Mother's Day bow.

The law never brings the Holy Spirit.

Therefore it does not justify because it only teaches what we ought to do.

But the gospel does bring the Holy Spirit because it teaches what we ought to receive therefore the law and the gospel are two altogether contrary doctrines accordingly to put righteousness into the law is simply to conflict with the gospel for the law is a taskmaster.

It demands that we work and that we give in short it wants to have something from us.

The gospel on the contrary does not demand it grants freely.

It commands us to hold out our hands and to receive what is being offered now demanding and granting receiving and offering our exact our exact opposites and cannot exist together for that which is granted I receive but that which I grant I do not receive but offer to someone else.

Therefore if the gospel is a gift and offers a gift it does not demand anything on the other hand the law does not grant anything it makes demands on us and impossible ones at that.

As you said, I think just a really powerful quote on the power of the law but even more so the power of the gospel.

And again should should there be fruit that comes from our life.

Yes, but not.

But not fruit that tries to prove our faith.

Proof.

That we are abiding in the spirit that we are being sanctified that gradual and growing process that the spirit does in us.

It's not us trying to do better just by simply doing better.

I need to stop cussing.

I need to stop doing this.

I need to stop doing that.

It's the Holy Spirit inside of you that goes I don't want to do these things anymore because it's separating me from Christ because it's separating me from his spirit and I don't I don't want to I don't want to run from his spirit.

I want to I want to be in his presence.

I want to be more like Christ and that is the spirit at work in you.

And that is a beautiful thing.

But so often what we can come into is I need to remove this from my life so that I can get closer to God.

Especially if you are believer God is with you.

But let God convict you of your sin convict you of your wrongdoing and yes he can he uses the law to do that.

But it's always for our good and it's always for the the maturation the maturity of the believer of becoming more like Christ.

And so what's our response first to receive his free gift of salvation to of salvation to sit in his presence and also to allow the Holy Spirit to convict and speak in our lives.

How do we hear from the spirit by getting back to the word of God by surrounding ourselves with other believers who who can actually see our lives and see the fruit of our lives and go hey what's going on man?

What's going on with this and it's not out of I guess it is kind of out of judgment, but it's also hey you said you're holding yourself to this standard and I don't I don't see that in you.

It's not a matter of salvation, but it's a matter of sanctification and God has given us the body of believers and the word to convict and challenge and to help us grow and be more like Christ.

Again, we have to have a proper view of self a proper view of sanctification proper view of our justification a proper view of all of these things before we get to the fruit of the Spirit because we can think that it is the fruit of self not the fruit of the Spirit.

But Paul is very clear.

It's not the fruit of self the fruit of us is sin and go back to Roman 6 for the wages of sin is death.

That's what we earn.

That's what we are and but the gift of free.

But the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus.

And so God has given us this free gift and it's beautiful and it's powerful and we'll get into again what that looks like in our life, but it starts with us having a proper view a proper understanding of justification.

We are justified.

We are made right in in God with God because of the work of Christ and we are sanctified.

We are becoming more like Christ not because of the things that we do but because of the work the Spirit is doing in us and for us.

And so then our posture our response is not to throw our hands back and go.

All right God.

I'm just going to keep on living my life how I want to know our response is God.

I am your servant.

I am your slave because as man one was that we were talking about a slave to sin and a slave Christ.

I am your slave.

I am your servant.

I am your vessel do with me what you will.

Where do we learn about his will his word and so there we go.

I'm beating a dead horse.

Hopefully we all have this proper understanding and this proper.

Theology of justification sanctification as well as our role in all of this.

God is at work in us.

Are you making yourself making yourself available to hear and read and see are you opening your life up to others so that they can see and hear what is happening so that we can all work together to be the church and grow in maturity with an end Christ.
