---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 5:1-6"
date: "2024-07-14T17:04:00.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/89209231/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-6-14%2F4bff7973-ba3e-7493-08c8-3bfea81b5a91.m4a"
duration: "27:38"
scripture: "Galatians 5:1-6"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: Salvation and justification are through Jesus Christ alone. 

guid: f0f0c5e7-a9fb-4fbe-9431-adefb7d199e2
episode_id: 956decbe
---

Salvation and justification are through Jesus Christ alone.

## Transcription

We are going to read all of Galatians 5.

If somebody wants to read that, Galatians chapter 5.

And then we will just camp out in the first six verses.

But this will be the passage for the next few weeks.

All of Galatians 5.

So if somebody wants to read it aloud.

And then...

Sweet.

Sweet.

Sweet.

I wish those who unsettle you would emasculate themselves.

I say, walk by the Spirit, and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh.

For the desires of the flesh are against the Spirit, and the desires of the Spirit are against the flesh.

For these are opposed to each other to keep you from doing the things you want to do.

But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.

Now the works of the flesh are evident.

Sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalry, dissension, division, envy, drunkenness, orgies, and things like these.

I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things will not inherit the Kingdom of God.

But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentle, self-control.

Against such things there is no law.

And those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.

If we live by the Spirit, let us also keep in step with the Spirit.

Let us not become conceited, provoking one another in being one another.

Awesome.

Thank you.

So we have turned a new corner in this letter.

And Paul spent the last part of Galatians 4 breaking down the story of Abraham and Sarah and Hagar and their two sons.

So Abraham and Sarah were rightfully married.

And then Hagar was Sarah's slave woman.

And of course, God told Abraham and Sarah that they would one day have a son.

And of course, this promise came in their old age.

And Sarah's like, how are we going to have a son?

How are we going to have a kid?

And then they took matters into their own hands.

And Sarah has the bright idea for Abraham to marry her slave Hagar and have a child.

And so that happens.

And then Ishmael comes.

And then finally, Abraham and Sarah have their son Isaac.

And then Hagar and Sarah, or sorry, Hagar and Ishmael get sent away.

And Paul uses this story comparing and contrasting Hagar and Sarah, which is Hagar being the law, as Paul talks about, and then Sarah being grace.

And Ishmael being the flesh and Isaac being spirit.

And those who are of faith in Jesus are Isaac.

We are free and live by the spirit.

Not like Ishmael, who was a slave under the law, even his mom is Paul uses the word that she was a slave woman.

So even though she was married to Abraham, she was still a slave.

And so then Paul ends chapter four recounting the story.

And he says, so, brothers, we are not like children of the slave, but of the free woman.

And then, of course, we turn to chapter five, where it says, for freedom, Christ has set us free.

Stand firm, therefore, and do not submit against the yoke of slavery.

And as we continue on, I want us to read that last verse of chapter four and the first verse of chapter five, because, again, chapters and verses were added way after the fact.

And this is one letter that Paul has written, but the chapters and verses were added for our reading pleasure.

And so we could easily say turn to chapter five, verse six, you know, instead of us being like, look at the four hundred and thirtieth paragraph and starting with the word.

So.

So let's read and if chapter four, verse third, I think it's 31 and the start of chapter five, all let's just read those two verses to get kind of the full transition.

So, brothers, we are not children of the slave, but of the free woman.

For freedom, Christ had set us free.

Stand firm, therefore, and do not submit again to a yoke of slavery.

And so Paul is driving home this point of freedom, right?

Those who have put their faith in Jesus are free and we must stand firm in that freedom and not look back to the law because the law was fulfilled by Jesus Christ.

Jesus said to himself, I did not come to abolish the law.

Right.

And when when we're talking about the law, we're talking about the whole mosaic law, all six hundred and thirteen rules of of moral law, which are good.

And we still follow today, which Jesus affirms moral law.

Right.

He sums it up in in two laws.

Love the Lord your God with our hearts, whole mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself.

Those are the two laws that from the six hundred thirteen, all of it kind of hangs on there.

Anyways, and then there's the ceremonial law.

Right.

Like circumcision would be one of those things.

Or and then there's the the civil law, which is in there, which is like an eye for an eye or a tooth for a tooth.

Or, you know, those are all things that you could read on your own time in Leviticus or some of Exodus.

Anyways, but Jesus says, I did not come to abolish the law, but to fulfill the law.

And as Paul stated previously in Galatians, the law was a guardian or a tutor or a teacher.

It was a foreshadowing of of it was it was a mirror showing the the Israelites showing the the the whole nation of Israel that they could not measure up to what God wanted and what God required of them.

And so, of course, God sends Jesus, his only son, to not abolish the law, but to fulfill it and say this has been fulfilled.

This served its purpose for a time.

But now, instead of obeying the law, which was your guardian, which was your tutor, you obey and put your faith in the son.

So we now stand firm in in the faith of who Jesus is.

So those who have put their faith in Jesus take up the blessing of one who has fulfilled the law, which is Jesus.

While Jesus took up the curse of those who broke the law, which is us.

Right.

And this is the beautiful exchange.

And Paul is and Paul says, because of that, stand firm in your faith and do not give in to what the Judaizers of the time around you who want to throw the law back on you.

There's this yoke of of of slavery.

Right.

And the words of Jesus, take my yoke upon you.

For my yoke is easy.

My burden is light.

Those are the words of Jesus.

And it is not the yoke of the law, which brought condemnation and which brought which which brought a curse of slavery.

He's saying, Paul saying, you can now take up the yoke or the burden of of Jesus, which is one of of faith, which will work its work itself out through the spirit, through love, which Paul would look it down there eventually.

But so then Paul continues, verses two through four.

Look, I, Paul, say to you that if you accept circumcision, Christ will be of no advantage to you.

I testify again to every man who accepts circumcision that he is obligated to keep the whole law.

You are severed from Christ.

You who would be justified by the law, you have fallen away from grace.

And of course, when Paul references circumcision, he's referring to keeping the whole to keeping the mosaic law.

Circumcision was a sign of obedience and submission to the mosaic law.

It had nothing to do with the actual physical procedure, but everything to do with the covenant that God made with Moses and the people of God.

So Paul is making a point about justification and again, just get justification means are declared righteousness before God, which was made possible by Christ death and resurrection for us.

Justification means are declared righteousness.

So before God, which was made possible by Christ death and resurrection for us.

So Paul is making this point about justification and the Galatian Church has been presented with two kinds of justification.

They were presented with we could say false justification, which is one through perfect obedience to the law.

And this is what the religious leaders taught that you had to submit to the law.

Again, he's Paul's referencing circumcision as the thing that is the sign of submission to the law.

So the first path of justification is through perfect obedience to the law.

And then the other is by faith alone in Christ alone.

And this is what Paul taught them when he first visited this region and planted the church there.

And these two paths are mutually exclusive.

You cannot be one foot in faith, one foot in works, one foot in faith, one foot in in obedience to the law.

You have to choose one.

And that's what Paul is is writing and saying.

You have turned from faith in Christ alone and are turning back to works of justification through your obedience to the law.

And if we seek justification and salvation through our obedience, then the perfect obedience of Christ is of no purpose.

Our salvation is not a joint enterprise between us and God, where he provides a little bit of help and then we do the best we can.

No, on the contrary, to attempt to bring forward our obedience as grounds for our justification is to bring ourselves is to bring on ourselves the obligation to obey the entire law, which we know no one did except for Jesus.

And Paul says, if you do this, if you try to earn your justification by your obedience, you will be severed from Christ and have fallen from Christ.

And this is a pretty big claim that he's making.

But also in there are some like good wordplay, right?

Because the false teachers were forcing others to be circumcised, to be safe.

We're using, we're forcing Gentiles to circumcision to be slave, which, of course, involves a severing of something.

But in submitting to circumcision for justification and salvation, a person not only severs them part of the anyways, the body, but also is severed from Christ.

So Paul is using a double entendre, if you will, saying in that seeking salvation through circumcision, the Galatians instead receive the curse of the covenant for to be severed from Christ is to be cut off from the blessing of Abraham.

So Paul is very smart and also kind of funny.

But when Paul says you have been severed from Christ and have fallen from grace, he does not mean that people lose their salvation.

Right.

We can see it in this chapter, Paul uses the language writing to the church brothers.

So there is a endearment among themselves.

Right.

There is a relationship still there.

He's not saying that they are completely cast out.

This wouldn't make sense if they were completely cut off from salvation.

And we can look to Paul's letter to the Romans where he says nothing can separate you from the love of Christ.

But Paul is saying that anyone with the visible, anyone within the visible body of Christ who seeks to be justified from the law is actually severed from Christ.

Those who seek to be justified by their works have fallen from the grace that they have tried to obtain.

An illustration that one of the commentaries use that I refer to often is it's like a child who stands on a stool to reach a high object, but then loses their balance and falls off.

So the person who tries to ascend to heaven by their works will inevitably fall back to earth because the weight of their sin and the curse of the law are too heavy for any sinner to overcome.

So when Paul says you are severed from Christ and you have fallen from grace, that's kind of the picture that we can use to see that a little more clearly.

So that's the salvation through works and obedience to the law.

Then we have verse five, which we get the other justification, the proper, the true justification where Paul says, for through the spirit by faith, we ourselves eagerly wait for the hope of righteousness.

The false teachers sought salvation by the flesh.

And Paul writes that salvation is through the spirit by faith.

Our redemption and salvation is not on us.

I'll say it again, our redemption and our salvation is not on us.

That is not something we have earned.

That is not something we have worked for.

It's not on the things that we could or could not do.

Our salvation is on Jesus.

We look to Christ.

We look to Jesus for our salvation.

He is the author and finisher of our faith.

We look to him, not ourselves.

Verse six, for in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision or uncircumcision counts for anything, but only faith working through love.

What matters to God?

Faith working through love.

Paul once again reminds the Galatians that concerning salvation, circumcision or uncircumcision was irrelevant.

Within the whole context of Galatians, Paul is saying that whether one was a Jew, circumcised, or a Gentile, uncircumcised, obedience to the law or racial identity counts for nothing.

Faith alone and Christ alone bring salvation and justification.

And faith produces the fruit of love, or as Paul said, faith working through love.

And once we are justified by faith alone, we do not attempt to return to the bondage of the law, but instead seek to manifest the love of Christ, which is the fruit of justifying faith.

Your works do not save you.

Being a good person does not save you.

No one has lived up to the law except Jesus and no one ever will.

So instead of looking externally to the law to keep us in God's will, we have the internal leading of the Holy Spirit of God to look to.

We have the Word of God to look to.

We have the person of Jesus that we see in the scriptures to look to, who says, again, love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself.

These are works done not to earn salvation, not to earn our justification.

That is signed, sealed, delivered under the blood of Jesus.

Those are things we cannot do.

But we must, if you are in Christ, you are a new creation.

So you must not look like your old self.

We must do everything we can in our power to submit to the Holy Spirit, to submit to the Word of God and trust by faith that as we follow Jesus, the fruit of the Spirit, which we read earlier and we'll get into in more detail in a couple of weeks, will work itself out in us.

These are not fruit that we can produce in and of ourselves.

But the fruit of the Spirit, the love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, gentleness, faithfulness and self-control, those things will work in us as we continually, as Paul says, keep in step with the Spirit.

As we submit our lives and submit ourselves to the Holy Spirit, to the Word of God, which again, the Spirit will never do or work against the book that he wrote.

And so we must, it's both and.

We know we have the Holy Spirit in us and we also have the Word of God given to us, which is a sure checks and balance of the Spirit in our lives.

And as we keep in step with the Spirit, we will become more like God.

And of course, that's sanctification, which is the Spirit working in through us and that that through God at work in our lives, we will become more like him.

And so it's nothing that we can produce on our own.

And as as we've said, in many different ways before, our salvation is not by works.

But we have a salvation that works.

And Paul is hammering down this point for what seems like the millionth time in this book of Galatians.

And we need to get it in us that we cannot produce one fruit of the Spirit.

And you might say, Nate, well, like, isn't there love and joy out there in the world and isn't there all these things?

And we talked about that a little bit last week.

Common grace, right?

Like God has given to all of us the ability to love, whether you're a believer or nonbeliever, to do good, to bring an impact on the world around us.

There is this common grace that is given to us.

But there is a difference when we are submitted to the Spirit and we have that love like Jesus loved.

I think of when Paul writes about marriage in Ephesians, right?

And he says, husbands, love your wives as Christ loved the church.

Of course, he gave his life for the church.

And that whole idea of husbands giving ourselves completely to our spouses, just as Christ gave himself completely for us.

And usually when that verse is talked about, right, like people like to go, well, you know, the order you got to submit women, submit, submit to your husband.

And it's like, yeah, you do.

But also husband, the submission should be easy if we're loving our spouses the way Christ loved the church.

And I know for me, that's the hard part.

It's easy for me to go submit, right, because I can just say it.

In fact, we were joking at the car the other day.

I'm not going to tell the story.

It's stupid.

It's stupid.

And it was a joke.

It was funny, though.

At least I thought so.

Anyways, the submission should be easy.

If the if the love of Jesus is there.

And of course, the acts of the flesh are obvious.

We're all selfish.

There's all a little bit of narcissist in us.

But we must, through the Spirit's help, model our lives after the man that we're that we follow.

We must model our lives after Jesus.

And to be a Christian, I mean, Christian literally means little Christ to be like Christ.

And I think that's the problem with our culture.

That's the problem with.

Even you hear a nation that was found on Christian principles.

We have this idea that our culture should look like Christ.

And it shouldn't because it's fallen.

It's broken.

We should look like Christ.

And impact the world and culture around us, not the other way around.

And with that, I get off my soapbox.
