---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 4:8-11"
date: "2024-06-23T19:23:08.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/88371784/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fproduction%2F2024-5-23%2F381450805-48000-1-f2d0e803e2a47.m4a"
duration: "35:29"
scripture: "Galatians 4:8-11"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: The Law of God\n
guid: 85f40b86-8b71-4861-85a7-18a8ae9171c8
episode_id: d2eef5e4
---

## Transcription

This morning we are going to be reading in chapter 4.

We are in verses 8 through 11.

I was hoping to get through more, but as you'll see there is a lot here in this very short collection of verses and sentences here.

And so just to start, why don't we read through the start of chapter 4 and then we can just read through verse 11.

So if somebody wants to read Galatians 4 verses 1 through 11.

I can do that.

Because you are sons, God has sent the spirit of his Son into our hearts crying, Allah, Father.

So you are no longer a slave but a son, and if a son, then an heir through God.

Formerly when you did not know God, you were enslaved to those that by nature are not gods.

And now that you have come to know God, or rather to be known by God, how can you turn back again to the weak and worthless elementary principles of the world, whose slaves you want to become once more?

You observe days and months and seasons and years.

I am afraid I have labored over you in vain.

Great.

Let me pray for us again this morning.

God, we thank you for who you are.

We thank you for your word.

We thank you that it is truth.

God, I pray as we continue to dive into your word that you would reveal yourself to us, Jesus.

And we thank you for your promise.

We thank you for your son.

And we thank you that we get to look to him for freedom, for truth, for salvation.

And yeah, we thank you for your word.

It's in your name.

Amen.

So turning back to verse 8, Paul turns his attention now to the Gentiles in the Galatian Church.

He just spent all this time breaking down, you know, looking back to chapter 3, breaking down Abrahamic covenant, Mosaic covenant, and all those covenants, which would have been a refresher to the Jews, but kind of, I guess, a revelation to the Gentiles.

And kind of a side note here, but I think like the beautiful thing of like church, the beautiful thing of us gathering, of us preaching and proclaiming Jesus is that we have a bunch of different people on different timelines, different times in their faith, different spectrums of their faith, if you will.

And in different stages and at different knowledge of God.

And that's a beautiful thing.

We aren't all theologians.

And some of us don't think about this stuff all day.

Some of us do or a lot of the day.

And but we're all part of the same body.

It's like when I go see Connor from my chiropractic adjustment, this isn't a marketing strategy at all.

He didn't pay me for this.

But it's like when I go in for adjustment, sure, he's like cracking my back and doing those things.

But I feel it all over my body, right?

My whole body feels better.

And even though he's just focusing in on one part.

And that's the same thing as we all work together, as we all have different perspectives, as well as just in different processes and in different parts of our in the maturity of our faith, which we're all wanting to learn and grow and grow in deeper knowledge of our faith.

We all get to work together to help each other and to learn from each other.

Again, like one, a story that is funny that kids are talking about right now.

Early on in mining Kayla's relationship, Kayla was newer to her faith when we started dating.

And as we were we were reading through the Bible and we got to the story of Noah and she we were like reading it and she was like she was just like completely struck by the fact that God sent his promise or visualize his visualize his promise through the rainbow.

And she was like, wait, that's why there's rainbows.

And it was like this like precious moment between us of going like, no, we there are different people at different stages of their faith.

And one of the things that I love about the way we have been going verse by verse through the word and spending this time together is that we have a time to like add comments or ask questions.

And as we grow as a church, Lord willing, we'll have people who are who ask really elementary questions and ask a very what could seem obvious to a believer might seem not obvious to an unbeliever or a new believer or a young believer.

And we have the opportunity to receive those questions with humility and grace and to encourage those questions.

And so that's why every week we usually have a time where we can either talk about it or ask questions.

And usually there's somebody else, not me answering the question, which is, I think, amazing.

And so I say all this to say, like, bring your bring your questions.

Paul, again, like we just talked about, Paul laid out a whole bunch of Old Testament sort of covenant theology and which, again, would have been like a refresher or like a no duh to the Jews at the time.

But again, he's talking to both Jew and Gentile and the Gentile might not have any idea of the the faith that they that the Jews were coming from and this new faith that was being ushered in through Jesus.

And so it's OK to ask questions.

In fact, I would prefer you ask questions.

This is a safe space to ask questions.

And I think part of the times and one of the things that I think people struggle with is, oh, this is how I wrote it down on my notes.

This is a safe space to feel stupid because I don't know about you.

But whenever I have a question that like might seem obvious or seem like how come I don't know this thing?

I obviously won.

I just turned inward and then there's some sort of shame or guilt or feeling of stupidity.

I should know this already.

I should have this figured out.

And this is a safe place to feel stupid and to voice that because you don't know what like like you don't know what everyone is thinking in this room.

And so you might be feeling it and someone else is feeling it, too.

And so if we can just address that, then we're all learning.

We're all growing.

And true, that's like real time feedback for me to go like, OK, I need to explain this better.

I need to think through these things even more than I am already trying to do.

And so we all learn and we all get better and we all get to help each other.

And we all get to to grow together and see each other take our our see each other take steps of faith.

And so there must be a spirit of humility, both ways, both to ask and also to give a graceful answer.

And so that was just a little side note.

Back to the scripture.

Any questions?

Save those to the end, please.

So that's funny.

So Paul is turning his attention to the Gentiles.

And as we talked about a few weeks ago, Paul made the point if you were under the law, again, the Jews, you were enslaved to the law.

And if you weren't under the law, you were a slave to the world.

And that would be the Gentiles.

And so now, verse nine, Paul goes, But now that you have come to know God, or rather to be known by God, how can you turn back again to the weak and worthless elementary principles of the world, whose slaves you want to be once more?

There's kind of two things here we're going to answer.

We're going to get to.

Anyways, I'm just going to talk.

Paul is asking them, how come they desire to forfeit their freedom in Christ and turn back to their enslaved ways?

For the Gentiles, taking circumcision as a means of salvation and justification was like returning to the philosophies and false gods that they were previously under and previously worshiped.

For the Jews to take circumcision as a means of salvation and justification was to return to the imprisonment of the law.

For both Jew and Gentile, it was an attempt to turn back the clock and live as if Jesus had never come.

So to reject this new sense of freedom in Christ, to reject that Jesus fulfilled all of Old Testament law, is to turn back the clock and act as if Jesus had never come.

And for the Gentiles to accept that same teaching that the Jews were implying on the Gentiles was them essentially turning back to worldly principles, back to worldly living, back to all of the Greek mythology and all of the Greek gods.

It was turning back to that.

And then Paul also in this verse goes, now he starts the verse and goes, now that you have come to know God or rather be known by God, which again, he's kind of hits at two different perspectives.

Paul is like clarifying his words of coming to know Jesus in the faith.

You have come to know God.

This is the person seeks God and finds God versus, Paul says, or rather be known by God, which is God seeking the sinful person and finding them and saving them.

So you see the difference.

You have come to know God, which is the person seeking out God or be known by God, which is the person which is God seeking after the person.

Right.

So to be known by God, you have come to know God.

This means that human initiative brings about salvation versus being known by God is the sovereign initiative of God brings salvation.

There's a big key difference there.

And so Paul goes, you've come to know God.

And he's like, let me take that back.

He couldn't, you know, backspace.

And so he goes, rather be known by God.

And this brings up the point that humans are incapable of reaching God.

Despite all of our efforts, despite our striving, we cannot attain or obtain the righteousness of God.

We can look all the way back to the Tower of Babel.

And there's these guys, there's these people who are trying to build up a stairway to heaven, if you will.

And what does God do?

He's like, this is just you guys are foolish.

I'm going to.

Here you go.

Here's a new language.

And they all just babble about and go on.

It was our first effort to try and reach God.

Shoot, we can take it even back to Adam and Eve.

Right.

You will become like God.

That's what the that's what the tree of life and knowledge of good and evil.

You would be you'd become like God, the serpent so craftily says.

And did God really say you would die?

Again, the serpent goes and and that's the persuasion.

So humans are capable of reaching God.

The only way we can be saved is by a God who came to be with us.

God descended down to find us and reach down to us.

And hallelujah.

Amen.

Amen.

Emmanuel.

God.

God with us.

So Paul's going.

Not only did God come down for us, but also in him doing so, if you do not receive that, you are turning back to things of this world.

You are missing the point of how God of what God accomplished through Jesus.

Then we're sent 11.

You observe days and months and seasons and years.

I'm afraid I may have labored over you in vain.

Paul uses very few words to communicate a massive point for the churches in Galatia and a massive point for us today.

Paul says you observe days, months, seasons, years.

He was referring to different celebrations in the Jewish calendar, right, like Sabbath and all the various feasts and things that would happen throughout the Jewish calendar and throughout the Old Testament.

And Paul, in no way intended to imply that moral demands of the law had been removed or canceled.

But Paul's point emphasizes the one of the problems with the that the early church faced and a problem that we still face today, which is what is the relationship between the Old Testament and the New Testament?

What do we follow of the Old Testament?

What do we what carries over?

And there what it's often talked about as like there's different kinds of laws there's in the Old Testament.

There's different kinds of laws in even there were ceremonial laws.

Right.

So what what what things did they do because of the ceremonies?

Right.

Like you can look at Passover.

What do they have to do that to bring in sheep into their house, then be with it for two weeks and then.

And so all these rules and then you had to use this take the blood over the doorpost and you have to eat all this meat and all this stuff.

And there's all these different things as part of this as part of the ceremony.

And there are civil laws that God gave the Israelites.

So what what laws are we going to function as a nation?

And then there is moral law.

And so we're going to dive into kind of what is the difference and also what what stays and what goes.

And so really the question we're asking and we'll answer is what is moral law?

And for the answer, we are going to turn to the 1689 London Baptist Confessional.

And this is a very old piece of of of a confession of faith that, of course, would have come about in the in the sixteen hundreds.

And this was written to bring theological clarity to the time and in particular to the particular Baptists.

And no word were not current modern day Baptists, but they got it.

They sure got it right all the way back in the sixteen hundreds.

And anyways, it was heavily influenced by the Westminster Confessional.

And we're going to read this is like an updated can the 1689 Baptist Confessional faith in modern English.

So some doctors and people took the original London Baptist Confession, which would have been written in Old English.

And they kind of just really changed the order of the words around to make sense for our listening ears.

And so I'm going to read out of this wonderful piece of work here, and we're going to read sort of seven different points.

And it's under the heading of the law of God.

And you'll quickly see why this thing is goaded.

The law of God.

God gave Adam a law of comprehensive obedience written in his heart and a specific precept not to eat the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.

By these, God obligated him and all his descendants to personal, total, exact and perpetual obedience.

Pause.

You'll probably recognize some of these words and some of the catechisms that we've had.

And it's because they they pull from old documents like this.

The New City Catechism does.

So if you're like, wait, what is personal perpetual?

What is that obedience?

I'm familiar.

It's anyways.

God promised life in Adam.

God.

God.

Sorry.

God promised life if Adam fulfilled it and threatened death, if he broke it and he gave Adam the power and ability to keep it.

First point, second point, the same law that was first written in the human heart continued to be a perfect rule of righteousness after the fall.

It was delivered by God on Mount Sinai and Ten Commandments and was written in two tables.

The first four commandments contain our duty to God and the other six are duty to humanity.

In addition to this law, usually called the moral law, God was pleased to give the people of Israel ceremonial laws containing several typological ordinances.

In some ways, these concerned worship by prefiguring Christ, his graces, actions, sufferings and benefits.

In other ways, they revealed various instructions about moral duties.

Since all of these were ceremonial laws, since all of these ceremonial laws were appointed only until the new order arrived.

They are now abolished and taken away by Jesus Christ as the true Messiah and the only lawgiver.

He was empowered by the father to do this to Israel.

He also gave various judicial laws, which ceased at the same time their nation ended.

These laws no longer obligate anyone as part of that institution.

Only their general principles of justice continue to have moral value.

Point five, the moral law forever requires obedience of everyone, both those who are justified as well as others.

These obligations arise not only because of its content, but also because of the authority of God, the creator who gave it.

Nor does Christ in any way dissolve this obligation in the gospel.

Instead, he greatly strengthens it.

Point six, true believers are not under the law as a covenant of works to be justified or condemned by it.

Yet it is very useful to them and to others as a rule of life that informs them of the will of God and their duty.

It directs and obligates them to live accordingly to its precepts.

It also exposes the sinful corruptions of their natures, hearts and lives as they examine themselves in the light of the law.

They come to further conviction of humiliation for and hatred of sin, along with a clear view of their need for Christ and the perfection of his obedience.

The law is also useful to the regenerate to restrain their corruptions because it forbids sin.

The punishment threatened by the law shows them that shows them what even their sin, what even their sins deserve and what troubles they may expect in this life due to their sin.

Even though they are freed from the curse and undiminished severity of it, the promises of the law likewise show them God's approval of obedience and the blessings they may expect when they keep it.

Even though these blessings are not owed to them by the law as a covenant of works, if people do good and refrain from evil because the law encourages good and discourages evil, that does not indicate that they are under the law and not under grace.

Point seven and lastly, these uses of the law are not contrary to the grace of the gospel, but are in sweet harmony with it.

For the spirit of Christ subdues and enables the human will to do freely and cheerfully what the will of God as revealed in the law requires.

Broken down very simply in Adam, he wrote laws on his heart.

Adam broke those laws by sinning.

God then gave the same laws to Moses through the Ten Commandments.

The first four is our of the Ten Commandments is our duty to God.

The last six is our duty to others.

God also gave the nation of Israel laws for ceremony and for their civil nation.

And those all those laws, the moral, the civil, the ceremonial laws were fulfilled in Christ Jesus.

But since the moral law was written on our hearts, was written on the first human's heart in Adam, those laws transcend the law of Israel, the nation, which one, Jesus fulfilled and also when Israel collapsed as a nation and they were taken over, those laws that reign of the law was abolished because the nation abolished with it.

What carried on was the law, the moral law, which Jesus said, Love the Lord your heart, love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself.

So he affirms that moral law and the Ten Commandments.

And now we as believers of Jesus have have that same moral law, one written on our heart and affirmed in our Savior Jesus Christ.

So that's kind of a lot there.

I'd be happy to post these in Slack if you guys want to read through those and see those.

And because yeah, it's a lot.

It's I understand it's a it's a very big pill to swallow.

And it's kind of ironic after I go like, yeah, let's ask questions and stuff.

And then I just give you a huge thing.

But I think it's important for us to see that even in that little sentence of Paul going, you still celebrate the ceremonies and seasons and things like that.

He's going like you because you're holding on to this, which has already been accomplished and already been fulfilled through Jesus.

You are in essence missing Jesus.

And and us today, we can get caught up in legalism and moralism and even like early believers like like, man, how come how come ladies you're allowed to talk in church?

How come you're how come we don't how come ladies don't wear head coverings?

How come men can have beards, can have short hair, can all these things that we see in the in the in the law in the Levitical law?

How come some of those apply?

How come some of those don't?

And it's important that we know and understand that not all of that, not all of the laws fall under certain categories, but we understand moral law by even looking at children.

Nobody had to tell any of our children.

That when when a sibling or somebody took something of theirs that that the sibling took something that was not theirs and your kid goes mine, that's mine.

Nobody had to tell them that they knew it.

It was written on their hearts that that was wrong that somebody took something from them.

Nobody had to tell them that it is written on their heart.

Now, of course, you can look and go.

Well, an example of this is like Ivy.

We had ice cream sandwiches the other day and I cut them to the best of my ability to be in perfect half.

But then Ivy goes, can I have the bigger half?

In the same hand, there is the the justice that knows right and wrong and the selfishness that is our our depravity of ourselves.

And so we have to hold this tension of not having to tell anybody.

We have to hold this tension of not everything of I am is not everything that I am is right or what I do is right.

And I think we're all of the maturity to know that.

But there is also part of me in me that God has written on my heart to know right and wrong.

And those two play together and work together.

I wouldn't say in harmony because we live in sin, but God has has put his law on our hearts.

And so let's get back to Galatians.

In Paul's case, the Jewish Christians were still celebrating many of the feasts of the day of the Old Testament.

And the error in that is that in such practices, whether in Paul's days or our own, it's the failure to grasp the concept that the Old Testament prefigures the person work of Christ and of Christ in its key persons.

So in the institution, ceremonies and rights, Augustine once explained that the Old Testament is revealed in the New Testament and the New Testament is hidden in the Old Testament.

And we may look at the Old Testament as the promise and the New Testament as the fulfillment.

OK, more technically, theologians would would say that the Old Testament is the shadow or the type.

And the New Testament is the reality to which the shadow points or the anti type.

So the Old Testament was the shadow was the was the prefigure was what what God desired and wanted.

And in Jesus, we have the fulfillment of that.

You don't need to look to the shadow anymore because you can see the person.

You can see where the reflection came from, if you will, to go along with the shadow.

Anyways, Paul writes this in Romans 514, yet death reigned from Adam to Moses and even over those who sinning was not like the transgression of Adam, who was a type of the one who was to come.

So Paul explains that Adam was the type of Jesus, the first Adam, and Adam was a rough sketch of Christ, the last Adam being the last Adam, the second Adam being Jesus.

But Adam isn't the only shadow of Jesus.

Moses, as a shepherd of Israel, looks forward to Christ, the true shepherd.

Aaron, as a high priest, looks forward to Christ, the true high priest.

David, as the king of Israel, looks forward to Christ, as the king of kings.

The prophets all anticipate and look forward to Christ, the ultimate prophet.

So the institutions and ceremonies of the Old Testament point forward to the person and work of Christ.

But when Christ came, the sacrifices, rites, and ceremonies that pointed to Christ were abolished.

They were done.

No more.

Adios.

God abolished the old order to establish a new order.

And the Judaizers didn't grasp the proper relationship between the Old Testament and the New Testament that they were living in.

Especially so concerning circumcision.

The Old Testament rite of circumcision pointed forward to the crucifixion.

The circumcision or cutting off of Christ from the presence of God.

This cutting off brought the outpouring of the Holy Spirit and him calling his people, which brings about the circumcision of the heart, which is talked about in Colossians.

So for these reasons, Paul lets out a sigh of discouragement.

And yet again, as we know in beginning of chapter three, Oh, you foolish Galatians who has bewitched you.

We see Paul again in a tizzy going, verse 11, I am afraid I may have labored over you in vain.

He is feared all was lost because they were trying to turn back the clock.

They were returning back to the bondage of the law rather than living in Christ from in Christ, which was given freedom from the curse of the law.

They were regressing from the light to the darkness, from grace in Jesus back to the laws that they were so familiar with, which is just a funny echo going back all the way to Moses and the Israelites of when they were in the wilderness.

They pled and said, Moses, why did you take us out of Egypt?

At least we had food there.

And yet we're living in the freedom of Christ, freedom of God.

And we can do the exact same thing.

So a lot there for us in just a few verses.

But let us not turn back to our own ways and our own desires.

Let us hold fast to the gospel, which is God pursued us and knows us and desires us.

And all we must do is receive and rest in the freedom of his finished work.

Are there laws and rules?

Yes.

But only the good ones.

And it's important for us to distinguish and know one for ourselves.

But also when we look at some of the key issues today, we can clearly see these moral laws are imprinted on our hearts, reinforced in scripture, and we can look to not only the person and the actions of Jesus, but also can see in the law one where we shall where we fall short, but also what Jesus has called us to to love the Lord our God with all of our hearts, soul, mind and strength and to love our neighbor as ourself.

And, man, how often do I not do those.

And yet I am reminded of the mercy and grace of God that allows me once again through his spirit at work in me to not try and earn my salvation.

Again, this isn't a matter of salvation.

This isn't a matter of your ticket to heaven or hell.

This is a matter of how we show our love to neighbor and to each other and show the work of Christ through the spirit in and through us.

And so let us be assured of our salvation through knowing who Christ is.

But also let us be sure of one, our humanity, our depravity, but also the spirit being at work in us.

And.
