---
layout: sermon
title: "John 3:22-36"
date: "2024-10-27T20:04:30.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/93658383/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-9-28%2F388865388-44100-2-d1a62b5e1625f.m4a"
duration: "25:43"
scripture: "John 3:22-36"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>He > I </p>

guid: 523cfb96-4862-4a7b-9baa-268f7182963b
episode_id: 028d9ba3
---

## Transcription

We're gonna be finishing up chapter 3 this morning.

And so why don't we just read from verse, John chapter 3 verse 22 through the end of the chapter.

Somebody wants to read that and then jump right in.

After this Jesus said his disciples went to the Judean countryside and he remained there with them and was baptized.

John also was baptizing at Anon near Silim because water was plentiful there and people were coming and being baptized for John had not yet been put in prison.

Now a discussion arose between some of John's disciples and a Jew over purification.

They came to John and said to him, Rabbi, he who was with you across the Jordan, to him you are witness.

Look, he is baptizing and all are going to him.

John answered, a person cannot receive even one thing unless it is given him from heaven.

Hear yourselves bear me witness that I said, I am not the Christ, but I have been sent before him.

The one who has the bride is the bridegroom.

The friend of the bridegroom who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly at the bridegroom's voice.

Therefore this joy of mine is now complete.

He must increase, but I must decrease.

He who comes from above is above all.

He who is of the earth belongs to the earth and speaks in an earthly way.

He who comes from heaven is above all.

He bears witness to what he has seen and heard, yet no one receives his testimony.

Whoever receives his testimony sets his seal to this, that God is true.

For he whom God has sent utters the words of God, for he gives the spirit without measure.

The father loves his son and has given all things into his hand.

Whoever believes in his son has eternal life.

Whoever does not obey the son shall not see life, but the wrath of God remains on him.

Awesome, so as we have been reading the last couple weeks, there's this conversation between Jesus and Nicodemus about new birth and being born again and then Jesus' most famous words, John 3.16.

And then after that conversation, we, I mean, it just says in the text, and after this, Jesus and his disciples went into the Judean countryside and he remained there with them and was baptizing.

And then so those first three, four verses, verse 22 through 25, it really sets the scene for us.

So we see both Jesus and John, John the Baptist were both there and were baptizing because water was plentiful there.

However much water is needed for them both to be baptizing, seems like there was enough for that.

So anyways, then there's this conversation that strikes up between some onlookers and John's disciples.

There were some Jews there and John's disciples and this discussion arises between them.

And so verse 26, it says, and they came to John and said to him, Rabbi, he who was with you across the Jordan to whom you bore witness, look, he is baptizing and all are going to him.

So there's these Jews and John's disciples who are watching this go down.

It would be like we're standing at a street corner and you're at this coffee shop and then a new coffee shop opens up just down the street and now everyone's going to that coffee shop and we're just sitting here kind of watching and hanging out with John the Baptist and we go like, John, how come everyone is going over to Jehovah Java and we're still here at Baptist Brew?

What the heck?

And so there's this like weird thing where they're like watching John the Baptist.

They've watched him.

They heard him.

They saw him declare, behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.

Like they saw all these things go down and now they see Jesus baptizing and they're like, dude, John, what the heck?

He's like on he's on your turf.

Like why is this like why is he doing what you were doing?

Like what's going on?

And John's response is nothing petty like theirs.

John the Baptist answers, a person cannot receive even one thing unless it is given him from heaven, which we can assume about these words, right?

As a person cannot receive one thing unless it is given him from heaven.

It seems as if John is talking about his his calling, right?

He's talking about what God had called him to do even before he was born, while he was in his mother's womb, he called and said what he was supposed to do.

And so it seems like he's sort of talking about his vocation, right?

His calling, his job, and which when we look at John's response, we could ask the question what do we have that we haven't received from God?

Every gift, every talent, every ability, everything that we have has been given to us from God.

And he has actually each given us our own vocation, right?

He's given us our own call.

Really that's what the word vocation means is to call.

And God has called each one of us to the place that we are in life.

And I think as we see in this conversation, we can so easily, just like John's disciples and the Jews do, we can slip into envy, we can slip into comparison, we can slip into jealousy even sometimes probably coveting what others have been called to, neglecting what we have been called to, right?

John is there with his disciples and with some other Jews and they're having this discussion over purification and then they see that Jesus is baptizing over there and they're like, John, this dude's taking your job.

What the, what's going on?

What the heck?

And John the Baptist could have responded and said, yeah, where is my recognition?

I am John the Baptist.

You are Jesus the Messiah, not Jesus the Baptist.

This is my swamp.

Why are all these people going to Jesus instead of me?

But John remembered his calling and which I think explains why John responds the way that he does.

A person cannot receive even one thing unless it is given him from heaven.

You yourselves bear me witness that I said I am not the Christ, but I have been sent before him.

John the Baptist knew from the beginning what his call was.

He knew what his role was in this whole operation, right?

Verse John chapter one verse 23, I am the voice of one crying out in the wilderness, make straight the way of the Lord as the prophet Isaiah said.

He was the forerunner of Jesus.

He was the forerunner of the Messiah, the forerunner of the King.

He proclaimed and said about Jesus, behold the lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.

John's whole purpose and ministry was pointing others to Jesus and now that Jesus had revealed himself he could watch his ministry bear fruit.

All those people who had come to John previously, all those people who had called him a prophet, all the people who had heard his word and made the steps into the river and baptized this baptism of repentance.

They could now look to Jesus as John was trying to do.

He was trying to point them to Jesus and then John the Baptist continues the same verse 29, the one who has the bride is the bridegroom.

The friend of the bridegroom who stands and hears him rejoices greatly at the bridegroom's voice.

Therefore this joy of mine is now complete.

John the Baptist could have been pointing back to the Old Testament and referencing the bride since Israel was sometimes called the bride of God.

But it is like John was saying I am not the groom.

The bride is not mine.

I'm like the best man.

I get a front row seat to this union, this coming together and it was John's joy and it was John's privilege.

He did not want the bride.

He knew his place.

He knew his call which is why he said verse 30, he must increase but I must decrease.

These are probably John the Baptist's most famous words and rightfully so.

Notice John says he must not should not might increase not maybe increase but must.

It was necessary.

This was not an option.

It was a must.

Jesus must increase.

John had his calling from God to prepare the way and announce the kingdom of God at hand and once Jesus had come, John had fulfilled his orders.

So now John had the ability to slide to the background so that Christ can emerge in his fullness as the Messiah.

John must decrease and Jesus must increase.

Why must Jesus increase?

Well verse 31 tells us, he who comes from above is above all because Jesus is from above from heaven.

He is above all.

Then we get this contrast.

He who is of the earth belongs to the earth.

Again we don't know if these are John the Baptist's words or John the Evangel they call him sometimes.

People do.

Or John the disciple or the disciple whom Jesus loved as John will call himself later.

We don't know if these are John's words or John the Baptist.

They are John's words.

We just don't know which we just don't know which John.

I kind of assume it's this is now John the disciples commentary because as we'll see here in a moment there's some language that really kind of connects with the prologue which John wrote in the very beginning of chapter one.

This whole section here kind of sounds like it but anyways it doesn't matter.

Still in there.

He who is of the earth belongs to the earth and speaks in an earthly way.

He who comes from heaven is above all.

Verse 32 he bears witness to what he has seen and heard yet no one receives his testimony.

Whoever receives his testimony sets his seal to this that God is true.

As I just said these words echo some of the prologue which we could just turn a page and go to John chapter one and see in verse 11 and 12.

He came to his own and his own people did not receive him but to all who did receive him who believed in his name he gave them the right to be children of God.

That sounds very similar to verse 32.

He bears witness I'm in chapter three again.

He bears witness to what he has seen and heard yet no one receives his testimony.

Again in John one the people did not receive him but who all who did receive him verse 33 whoever receives his testimony sets a seal to this that God is true.

That's chapter three chapter one who believed in his name he gave the right to become children of God.

That's true too.

Back to verse 34 in chapter three.

For he whom God has sent Jesus utters the words of God for he gives the spirit without measure.

God sent Jesus and gave Jesus his spirit without measure.

God did not withhold anything from Jesus but gave him the fullness of the spirit to his son.

This reminds me of John chapter 17 where Jesus is praying first for his disciples for his 11, 12 if you count Judas I'm sure he was on that prayer because thank God that he loves those who reject him and sell him short.

Amen.

As he was praying for his disciples and also what will be his church so us and he said about himself and the father he says in John 17 verse 21 that they may all be one just as you father are in me and I in you.

So we see this unity this oneness of the father son and spirit and so of course God gave to the son without measure.

They are one.

You cannot be one and withhold something or else it's not there's no oneness.

Which is probably some good marriage advice but that's for another time.

Then this all wraps up with verse 35 and 36.

The father loves the son and has given all things into his hand.

Whoever believes in the son has eternal life.

Whoever does not obey the son shall not see life but the wrath of God remains on him.

As I was preparing and studying and putting my notes together for this morning I was reading R.

C.

Sproul's commentary on John and if you're not familiar with R.

C.

Sproul he was a very prominent reform theologian and pastor and he pastored from about the 1960s truly until he died in 2017 and his ministry significantly influenced the modern reformation and modern reform theology and his remarks at the end of this chapter were just so good that I'm just going to read you the quote directly.

So let me read these last two verses to you and then I'll read the quote and then I'll kind of I'll wrap this up.

John 3 verse 35 and 36.

The father loves the son and has given all things into his hand.

Whoever believes in the son has eternal life.

Whoever does not obey the son shall not see life but the wrath of God remains on him.

Here are the remarks the comments from R.

C.

Sproul.

The whole of scripture speaks to us of the love of God for his people but so often we fix our attention on God's love for us that we forget that the ground of that love is the love that the father has from eternity for his son.

I'm going to read that again because this is crucial.

The whole scripture speaks to us of the love of God for his people but so often we fix our attention on God's love for us that we forget that the ground of that love is the love that the father has from eternity for his son.

Remember we are not the natural children of God.

We are the adopted children of God and even our election must always be understood to be in the son.

It is because of the father's love for the son that we can stand forgiven before the throne of God delivered from wrath unto everlasting life.

It is because of the love of the father for the son that we are invited to partake one day of the marriage feast of the Lamb.

We are invited not simply as friends of the bridegroom or as friends of the bride, we are the bride.

Christ our Savior has set his love upon us and betrothed us to himself.

He who died for us will come again someday to receive us to himself.

Then we will rejoice with him in the final increase of his exaltation.

So good.

One last comment and then I'll close this out.

Usually on Saturdays, Kayla and I will talk through the message and we were just sort of chatting back and forth and we talked about the like, he is greater than I, you know, like the he must increase, sorry, he must increase, I must decrease those stickers, those bumper stickers.

It's another popular saying and we're talking about how that is very true, right?

Like Jesus must increase and we must decrease.

There is truth to that, but I think those stickers and even the interpretation of that is narcissistic because first off, we must realize that we are not John the Baptist.

But what's the principle?

What's the truth behind it?

In context, we see these Jews and John's disciples, they were trying to, for lack of a better term, they were trying to put glory on John the Baptist and John the Baptist said, no, this belongs to Jesus.

And oftentimes when I think of he must increase, I must decrease, what that says is, yeah, I need to put Jesus back in his right place when Jesus is already in his right place, whether you put him there or not.

But we must understand that the glory that we often try to take for ourselves, we cannot carry, we cannot hold, we are not meant for glory, we are not meant for glorification, we are meant to glorify.

Our catechism says, we are not our own, but belong body, soul, both in life and death, to God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

And so, and that's, anyways, we must, in all that we do, remember who we belong to, also remember that we love to make idols.

As we talked about last week and talked about that snake that Moses lifted up, what did they do?

They kept that snake around for years and years and years.

It was an idol.

It became an idol.

A momentary healing, a foreshadow to the gospel became the gospel itself.

And that's not what that bronze serpent was supposed to be.

That's not what us recounting, he must become greater, I must become less, is supposed to be.

It's this, in context, this thing of John the Baptist not taking the glory for himself, but his whole ministry was about taking, was preparing the way, was pointing people to Jesus.

And here are his disciples trying to point not to Jesus, but back to John.

And it can be so easy for us today, for me as a pastor, when somebody says, oh, what a great message, for me to get an inflamed head and for me to build my ego, but it's not about that.

And so this is a reminder for me, it's a reminder for us, one, who we are, that we are fallen, broken, that we are sinful beings, that even God's love for us is not in light of us, it is in the light of his son, and because of his son and his perfection, do we get eternal life?

Do we get right relationship with God?

And it is so, it is because of that love that God loves the world, that God loves us, and so, let us not be people who hoard glory, who hoard praise, and that's not to say that, you know, in everything, like, the flip side of that coin is like pastors who are always like, oh man, such a great message, it's all God!

Like, or people in everything, like, praise God, yes, praise God, thank God!

It doesn't have to be this big show or big thing, but we must internally first remember that we belong to God.

Mind, body, soul, spirit, everything that we are belongs to God.

And he has given us the call to be children, to be spouses, to be parents, to be whatever profession you are, not to just make money and live life, not to just be a father to be a father, or be a mother to be a mother, or be a son to be a son, daughter to daughter, but in everything that we do, we must push our attention to God.

And it doesn't have to be in this corny way where we take every moment and try to gospelize it.

We should take some moments and share the gospel.

But everything that we do, to point others to Christ by the way we live, by the way we interact, pointing others to Jesus, just as John the Baptist did.

Because Jesus has increased, and so we must decrease.

That's all I got.
