---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 5:19-26"
date: "2024-08-04T14:54:13.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/90160450/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-7-7%2F5d6cf6fa-d6f4-081a-b314-abc672f0de73.m4a"
duration: "23:27"
scripture: "Galatians 5:19-26"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: Fruit of the Spirit in the Old Testament

guid: d9a5c976-5153-4f25-89c1-a5e174cdaf70
episode_id: 88f9d734
---

## Transcription

Galatians chapter 5.

Why don't we read just the, let's just read chapter 5 and then we'll go from there.

Somebody wants to read it?

For freedom Christ has set us free.

Stand firm therefore and do not submit again to a yoke of slavery.

Look, I, Paul, say to you that if you accept circumcision, Christ will be of no advantage to you.

I testify again to every man who accepts circumcision.

He is obligated to keep the whole law.

You are severed from Christ, you who would be crucified.

By the law you have fallen away from grace.

Through the spirit of faith we ourselves eagerly wait for the hope of righteousness.

For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision or uncircumcision counts for anything but only faith working through love.

You were running well.

Who hindered you from obeying the truth?

This persuasion is not from him who calls you and little leavens the whole love.

I have confidence in the Lord that you will take no other view and the one who's troubling you will bear the penalty whoever he is.

But if I, brothers, still preach circumcision, why am I still being persecuted?

In that case the offense of the cross has been removed.

I wish those who unseal you would emasculate themselves.

For you were called to freedom, brothers.

Only do not use the freedom as an opportunity for the flesh but through love serve one another.

For the whole law is filled in one word.

You shall love your neighbor as yourself but if you bite, devour one another.

Watch out that you are not consumed by one another.

But I say walk by the Spirit and you will not fratify the desires of the flesh.

For the desires of the flesh are against the Spirit and the desires of the Spirit are against the flesh.

For these are opposed to each other to keep you from doing the things you want to do.

But if you are led by the Spirit you are not under the law.

Now the works of the flesh are evident.

Sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, it's an anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, envy, drunkenness, orgies, and things like these.

I warn you as I warned you before those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.

The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control.

Against such things there is no law.

And those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.

If you live by the Spirit let us also keep in step with the Spirit.

Let us not become conceited, provoking one another.

Awesome.

Thank you.

You probably heard it said before those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it or something along those lines.

And this is essentially what Paul is doing with the Galatian Church.

He's calling on the story of their past, like we talked about last week, walking by the Spirit, and how that was a callback to the Israelites' exile Egypt and how on their wanderings through the desert they were supposed to follow a cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night.

And so when Paul says walk by the Spirit he's calling back to that imagery and he's calling on these stories to remember, for the audience to remember, the stories of their past but also to see how God has been writing this story all along.

He also wanted them to remember Israel's failures and learn that their salvation was not dependent on their faithfulness to God but our salvation is dependent upon God's faithfulness and covenant promises.

And so Paul in the, when he mentions both the fruit of the Spirit and the fruit of the flesh, he is again calling back on Old Testament scriptures to, for them to see and know the fruit that God requires and the fruit that God desires.

So we're actually gonna look today at the fruit of the Spirit in the Old Testament.

So we'll turn to Isaiah, that's where we're gonna spend a majority of our time.

And there's a few scriptures I want us to see all call out the passages and if people want to just either put a finger there in your Bible if you have a paper Bible or if you want to turn there to read.

I need somebody in Isaiah chapter 5, then chapter 11, then chapter 27, and then chapter 51.

Okay, so in this first and I'll kind of, I'll drop in and teach throughout, we're not just gonna read all these straight through.

First we're gonna look at Isaiah chapter 5 and we're gonna see how the prophet Isaiah, which we don't have enough time to dive into all the complexities and the beauty of the book of Isaiah because it does a lot of stuff.

But we'll see, you'll see the thread throughout.

But Israel is likened here in this path in Isaiah 5 and this is the start of the thread here.

How Israel is referred to as a grapes and a vineyard and the author was trying to communicate how the Israelites have abandoned the law and been in the acts of the flesh.

So let's read Isaiah 5 verses 1 through 7.

What more was there to do for my vineyard?

What I have not done that I have not done in it.

When I look for it to yield grapes, why did it yield wild grapes?

And now I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard.

I will remove its hedge and it shall be devoured.

I will break down its wall and it shall be trampled down.

I will make it a waste.

It shall not be pruned or hoed and briars and thorns shall grow up.

I will also command the clouds that they rain, no rain upon it.

For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel and the men of Judah are his pleasant planting.

And he looked for justice but behold bloodshed for righteousness but behold an outcry.

So Israel was God's vineyard and the wild grapes that they produced were bloodshed, violence, and wickedness instead of righteousness and justice that God expected.

So as we continue to read this, let's keep Israel as the fruitless vineyard in mind as we look at the, as we're comparing it to the passage in Galatians.

We should also remember Paul's own kind of rebuttal to the Judaizers, to the people who were teaching falsely to the Galatians.

And when he would say, if you're going to try and keep the law, you must keep the whole law and not just parts of it.

And if their ancestors failed, right, that's what Paul is doing.

He's calling back, hey remember you just, you can't just keep part of the law.

If you're going to keep the law, you have to, you must keep the whole law.

And in doing that, in recalling that argument, he's going, if your ancestors failed, then what makes you any different?

Then let's keep going through Isaiah.

Isaiah keeps this fruit and vineyard talk in chapter 11 verses 1 through 5.

So right there, that's like, we are so incredibly blessed.

To live post Jesus, because now we can look back at these passages and see like, holy smokes, Isaiah, hundreds of years before Jesus ever arrived, is literally writing, there shall come forth a shoot from the stump of Jesse, which of course David, and we know Jesus falls in that genealogy, and a branch from his roots shall bear fruit.

So, and Isaiah was writing this to an Israel in exile.

And so now, as they're hearing this, there is this shoot of hope.

There is a silver lining, if you will, to Israel in exile, that a future fruit bearing branch would come, and that the Holy Spirit would rest on him.

But wait, there's more, chapter 27 verse 6.

You catch that?

Isaiah prophesies of a time when Israel would fill the entire world with fruit.

So God promises through the prophet that the shoot from the stump of Jesse, Jesus will bear fruit.

And okay, pause, there's more, but all this imagery is associated with creation and echoes all the way back to the very opening chapters in Genesis.

So the creation was completed and ended with the first Adam standing in the midst of fruit.

And God tells him to tend to it and to name all the animals and all the fun stuff.

But he's standing in the midst of these fruit bearing trees.

But then notice how God characterizes Israel's renewal in Isaiah 51 verse 3.

So sorry.

You're all good.

For the Lord comforts Zion, he comforts all her waste places and makes her wilderness like Eden, her desert like the garden of the Lord.

Joy and gladness will be found in her, thanksgiving in the voice of song.

So the renewal of creation through Christ and the Spirit is compared or likened to the perfection of the garden or the garden or the temple, sometimes referred to the temple of Eden.

So let's go back to the garden.

The first Adam was placed in the world to rule over it, to spread God's image throughout the world and to extend the garden throughout the world.

And what did Adam do?

He failed.

He rebelled against God and surrendered his reign to the powers of Satan, sin and death.

And Adam is marked by the works of the flesh.

Galatians 5, 19.

Now the works of the flesh are evident.

Sexual morality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, division, envy, drunkenness, orgies and things like these.

I warn you as I warned you before that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.

We can look at all the way back to the story of Adam.

They leave the garden or cast out of the garden, out of God's perfection where humanity, where the creation and creator were in balance and there was peace and there was perfection and then man's sins and now there is division amongst man and God and against man and woman and against human and human.

And now we have this, I mean we can look at the beginning stories from Genesis and essentially see all the things that are listed here in the works of the flesh are right there before you even get to chapter 12.

It's like it's all there, the whole kitten capoodle.

And all these things arise from the sin of Adam and all those who are in Adam manifest these wicked works.

Now let's compare the works of Adam versus the works of Jesus.

Christ suffered the curse on our behalf so that we would receive the promised spirit through faith.

The promise outpouring of the spirit mentioned not only in Isaiah but also in the book of Joel was performed through Jesus with his ascension to the right hand of the father.

We can see that fulfilled in Acts 2.

And so for all these reasons in 1st Corinthians 15 45 Paul says the first man Adam became a living being.

The last Adam, Jesus, became a life-giving spirit.

So through the outpouring of the spirit God's people are indwelt and enabled to produce the fruit of the spirit because Jesus is a life-giving spirit.

But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control.

Against such things there is no law.

So Jesus became the fruitful vineyard that God desired.

He is the shoot and branch from Jesse that was promised and he gives us his spirit so that the whole world would be filled with his fruit.

Gearhartus Voss is a 19th century professor of biblical theology.

He describes the benefits of Jesus and the benefits that Christ has secured in our justification, sanctification, and glorification in this way.

And now you and I can come and take of the bread and water of life freely.

Through justification we are even in this life filled with the fullness of his merit and appear to God as spotless and blameless as though sin had never touched us.

Through sanctification his holy character is impressed on our souls so that not withstanding our imperfections God takes a true delight in us, seeing that the inner man is changed from day to day after the likeness of Christ and the full meaning of our Lord's promise we shall know we shall know in the last day when when he shall satisfy himself in us by presenting us to God perfect in body soul and spirit then shall come to pass the word that is written they shall hunger no more neither thirst anymore for we shall behold God's face in righteousness and be satisfied when we awake with his image.

Quite literally when we walk by the spirit the love that we show others the joy that we know even during trials the peace of God that we have and share with others through the gospel in all of these things we experience and manifest the very things God promised through the prophet Isaiah over 2500 years ago.

We are living in the promises of God.

We are walking in the spirit of the promises of God the finished work of Jesus.

It's incredible.

Something to note here in verse 21 Galatians 5 21 I warn you as I warned you before that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.

Again and this is in he says that after the works of the flesh so do our works save us no but our our works against God have condemned us right for the wages of sin is death but if we look to Jesus by faith then his righteousness is accounted to us and we inherit his kingdom.

Just something quick there.

We're there so bring it up right.

Why did Paul call them fruit of the spirit versus works of the spirit right because like anyways you guys you guys understand what I'm saying.

First because of everything we just talked about drawing on the completion of these Old Testament prophecies and language it is it has all been the works of the spirit or the the fruit of the spirit if you will sorry but second it ultimately is the spirit as we rest in his power who produces his fruit in us as we have stated and said the what we produce because of the first atom is death.

No one is good but God alone.

We do not produce good works but when we come to faith in Christ spirit dwells within us and we now have this life-giving spirit as Paul says who produces these good works in us these good fruits in us produces his fruit in us.

We do not produce these characteristics of righteousness but rather Christ through his spirit produces them.

Galatians 2 20 I have been crucified with Christ it is no longer I who live but Christ who lives in me and the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the son of God who loved me and gave himself for me.

So these teachings of Paul completely oppose the teachings of the Judaizers who through their own effort were trying to produce the righteousness that God required.

The false teachers failed to understand how God has fulfilled the requirements of the law not through greater efforts at obedience by his people but through his son.

Romans 8 3 through 4 says for God has done what the law weakened by the flesh could not do by sending his own son in the likeness of sinful flesh for sin he condemns sin in the flesh in order that the righteous requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us who walk not according to the flesh but according to the spirit.

Seeing the Old Testament background to the fruit of the spirit should show us uh should show us how our redemption has been unfolding and uh active long before we were even born.

Our redemption stretches back to before the foundation of the world yet we are so quick to forget our past.

How faithful he has been to us even before we were born.

We must daily uh we must hourly if not minutely uh remember God's faithfulness and look to all his promises and their fulfillment.

We must confront our faithlessness with not more works of trying to earn something but we must confront our faithlessness with God's faithfulness in Christ.

Um that's all I've got.
