---
layout: sermon
title: "John 2:1-11"
date: "2024-09-29T14:12:33.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/92384751/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-8-30%2F025df531-5784-56f0-a0cc-705105bbcc76.m4a"
duration: "28:37"
scripture: "John 2:1-11"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>Jesus' first miracle.</p>\n
guid: 9fdb6e42-d333-4386-9e71-b887bdb96338
episode_id: 422d7539
---

## Transcription

John chapter 2 if somebody wants to read it for us.

I'll do it.

I'll do it.

The master of the feast called the bridegroom and said to him, Everyone serves the good wine first, and when people have drunk freely, then the poor wine.

But you have kept the good wine until now.

This, the first of his signs, Jesus did at Cana in Galilee, and manifested his glory, and his disciples believed in him.

After this, he went down to Capernaum with his mother and his brothers and his disciples, and they stayed there for a few days.

The Passover of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

In the temple he found those who were selling oxen and sheep and pigeons, and the money changers sitting there.

And making a whip of cords, he drove them all out of the temple with the sheep and oxen, and he poured out the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.

And he told those who sold the pigeons, Take these things away.

Do not make my father's house a house of trade.

His disciples remembered that it was written, Zeal for your house will consume me.

So the Jews said to him, What sign do you show us for doing these things?

Jesus answered them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.

The Jews then said, It has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and will you raise it up in three days?

But he was speaking about the temple of his body.

When therefore he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they believed the scripture and the word that Jesus had spoken.

Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover feast, many believed in his name when they saw the signs that he was doing.

But Jesus on his part did not entrust himself to them, because he knew all people and needed no one to bear witness about man, for he himself knew what was in man.

So we're at the beginning of Jesus' ministry, public ministry, and over the next eleven or so chapters, it's all filled with his ministry.

But the next few chapters could be categorized as sort of like new.

I mean, we just, and to be specific, think of 2 Corinthians 5, 17, the old is gone, the new has come.

And even what we just read in the chapter, so we've got new wine, right?

He turns water into wine, and then he says, I will, this temple will be destroyed, and in three days I will build it up, so there's a new temple.

And so we can already see this imagery or this theming of new.

Jesus is doing something new.

And so, but this morning we're just specifically going to look at this first miracle that happened at the wedding in Cana.

And let's just start very surface level.

Jesus was invited to a wedding, right?

Like he was the kind of guy that you wanted around, you wanted to be around Jesus.

It wasn't just like, I mean, he even got like, let's just say five or three, three or five plus ones, right?

He brought his friends with him.

He brought his disciples with him.

And so maybe they all knew this person or this couple, but whatever.

He was a likable and enjoyable person.

That's good.

Another kind of surface level detail, but important.

And I mean, John puts it in the text, so there's obviously some sort of, I wouldn't say, he's writing for some, he's jotting it down for some reason.

And that is the actual days of the week, like what we just read in chapter two, it says three day on the third day, right?

And so we can actually trace back an entire week of Jesus's first sort of public week in ministry, right?

If you flip back to chapter one, verse 19, we see day one.

This is day one, John the Baptist and his conversation with the religious leaders.

And then in verse 29, it's very clear it says the next day.

And then verse 35, it says the next day.

And so I'll read out the ones that say the next day and it's not going to equal seven.

OK, watch.

So we just said day one, verse 19, right?

Day two, the next day, verse 29.

Verse 35 is the next day.

That's three days.

Then verse 43, we see the next day.

Right.

So that's four days.

And then on the third day, which actually is two sleeps.

So think of Jesus died on Friday, then Saturday, Sunday, third day.

So really, it's two days, but we call it the third day.

And so that leads us a day short then.

Right.

It doesn't.

And I'll show you now because this was at first I was like, no, that's right.

But then I was like, wait, the third day, that's.

And then in my study in referencing commentaries that I reference, there was a an explanation.

So because those aren't the only time markers we have where he says the next day.

So if we jump back to one chapter one, verse 35, the next day, then verse 39, it was about four p.m. and they stayed with him that day.

So that closes then one, two, three, that closes day three.

And then we could assume those next verses there when he says verse 41, he first got up or he first went to.

Simon or yet would be the next day.

Like first thing in the morning, we could.

Seeing that it was about four p.m. right on day three and they stayed that day with him, that would close the day.

Then he first gets up, which would mean Andrew's introduction of Simon Peter to Jesus takes place on that next day, which would be the fourth day.

Then day five happens, verse 43, then the third day, day six, day seven.

There you go.

There we made it a week.

We made it a week.

Why does this matter?

How did John start his gospel in the beginning?

Right.

In the beginning was the word.

The word was with God.

The word was God.

John is pointing to the creation narrative.

And then John gives us seven days time to echo this new creation, to show this new creation.

And then what does he do on the Sabbath?

He creates new wine.

So it's.

I didn't come up with this.

Some smarter people than I.

And then you see it in the text and I'm like, well, this is crazy.

The imagery, the.

The imagery, the intentionality.

And I don't know if I ever said this, if I did, I'll repeat myself.

John, is that you?

In Jesus name.

So.

A lot of people, when they read John or look at John, they kind of take it as like John piecing these stories together.

But if John is giving us these these time markers and these day markers, we ought to take them seriously.

And so he's just laid out for us this whole week of John, Jesus's interaction with John the Baptist, then some of his first disciples.

And then now we get to this wedding in Cana.

And so on the third day, right, there was a wedding at Cana and Galley.

And the mother of Jesus was there.

Jesus was also invited to the wedding with his disciples.

When the wine ran out, the mother of Jesus said to him, they have no wine.

So Jesus at this wedding with his mother, some of his disciples and Mary looks at him.

They have no wine.

And for the.

For the bride and groom, this would have been a devastating thing.

Like this would have been completely shameful.

In fact, there's history that shows that if the preparations for the wedding were not complete, the bride or sorry, the groom could be held liable to like actual lawsuit from the bride's family.

So like very serious that these things could could not that it was a proper ceremony because weddings, these weddings could last up to a week.

So there's lots of preparation, lots of things that actually needed to take place.

And so Mary turns to Jesus and says they have no wine.

And Jesus responds, woman, what does this have to do with me?

My hour is not yet come.

And in our current context, like we laugh when he says woman, because we expect we're thinking like, like woman, like get back to the kitchen.

Like that's kind of what you're expecting.

Right.

But when Jesus is saying this, it's not it's not coming from that rude place or sarcastic place.

And he actually uses that same word woman.

And then when he when he's addressing the woman at the well, which is in John, Chapter four, and then when Jesus is on the cross, he also addresses his mother again using woman.

And so it would almost be like like saying, sir, and ma'am here in the South for us new to the South.

It's a new thing.

But for everyone who's grown up here and been here, it's just part of common courtesy and just normal talk that you would say, yes, sir.

Yes, ma'am.

Same thing with woman.

It just sounds funny in our context.

Woman, what does this have to do with me?

He continues after addressing her and says, what does have to do with me, which is a great question.

What does this have to do with Jesus?

And he's not responsible for the wedding.

But I think what this does show is that his mother, Mary, was actually just reliant upon her eldest son on her firstborn son.

And it is kind of to Bible scholars and to in that whole world, it's kind of common knowledge that Joseph is dead by this point.

So by the time that Jesus has started his ministry, Joseph is is dead.

So and we know Jesus was a carpenter.

So Jesus was working for his family.

He obviously is their firstborn son.

And so Jesus is doing what the eldest son would do and taking care of the family.

And so Mary would have been used to going to Jesus for things.

She would have been used to telling him, oh, we've we don't have this or we have that or this thing came up.

And so we just see it.

We see a very normal interaction between a mother and a son who would have been the head of the house, if you will.

So Mary is just just like kind of saying, the wine's gone.

And then Jesus goes, what does this have to do with me?

And then he says, my hour is not yet come.

And of course, only Jesus would have had the foresight of what was to come.

Of course, that being the cross.

And we will see throughout John's letter that Jesus often a few times says this phrase, my hour is not yet come or my time is not yet come.

And which why?

Because as it said, I think a couple of times in this chapter and even going back to last week and or maybe two weeks ago, talking about John the Baptist and his and his doubt for the Messiah, Jesus said it himself.

And we see it here in the text.

The signs were the miracles were one of the signs of the Messiah.

So when Jesus starts doing miracles, when Jesus starts healing people, it is a sign that the Messiah is here.

And of course, we see as Jesus performs miracles, the Pharisees and the Sadducees, they get very upset.

They get very angry because they don't want Jesus to be the Messiah.

It's not it's not the Messiah that they were expecting.

And so the signs are a sign of the Messiah.

So as Jesus is performing these miracles and when he says my time is not yet come, my hour is not yet come, he is saying it's not yet time for me to fully reveal myself.

But then what does he do?

He does it anyways.

So Mary, verse five, Mary takes Jesus' rebuke and says, do whatever he tells you.

Like, I just think that's funny.

So then Jesus gives these servers, servants, whatever they were, recipe on making 120 to 180 gallons of wine with simply just water.

And they do it.

Could you imagine being one of these servers?

He's like tells you like, go fill up these big old purification jars, which is like you use that to like wash your hands and like to get like clean for the banquet.

And so Jesus is like using this ordinary thing and does something extraordinary in it, of course.

But then so they do it and then they take it to the master of the ceremonies, the master of the feast.

Like, did they take a little sip before they got there?

Like, like, what, what is this interaction?

Like, did they just go straight on?

Like, was it white wine?

Was it red wine?

Was it white wine?

Was it red wine?

Like, these are all the questions I'm asking.

And so then they give it to them to the master of the feast and the emcee goes, this is the best wine all night.

Like, he is completely just amazed.

Verse 10, everyone serves the good one first.

But when the people have drunk freely, then the poor wine.

But you have kept the good one until now.

And that's crazy.

Then we get to verse 11.

This is this the first of his signs.

Jesus did at Canaan Galley and manifested his glory and his disciples believed in him.

The question I want to answer, I guess, is kind of twofold.

Why did Jesus turn water into wine?

Then second, why was this his first miracle?

Two questions I want to answer.

Questions I'm asking.

There's, there's a lot.

But to first answer this question, we'll just see what exactly what we see in the text.

Jesus did it so his disciples would believe in him.

Says right there, verse 11.

This is the first of his signs.

You sit at Canaan Galley and manifest his glory and his disciples believed in him.

What was the point of the signs so that people would believe he was the Messiah?

What is the point of him healing?

Not so that people could, you know, walk away freely, although he's so good that he did that.

But the point was so that they would believe in him.

Of course, the disciples that he had there with him, they were following him.

They heard John the Baptist's testimony of him.

And so they had some sort of idea that he of who he was.

But now they witness his power.

Now they witness his might.

It doesn't say that he like prayed over these jars.

It doesn't say that he did anything spectacular or he looked up to heaven and like did some weird silent magic.

He just told him what to do and it did it.

And they witnessed that power, them and the servers.

No one else knew.

But the servers and his disciples and probably Mary.

So that's the first explanation of why so that they would believe in him.

Then there's also some Old Testament references that we're going to look at that could be connected to the reasoning of why Jesus turned water into wine.

In Isaiah 25, it's describing a redeemed people who are celebrating their freedom by God.

So it is people celebrating that celebrating the return, right?

Because they're exiled.

So it's people who are celebrating the return to their liberation.

They're free now.

They're no longer captives.

And this was a it was a time celebrating what it will be like when the Messiah arrives, right?

Because somebody needs to free them.

And it says in Isaiah 25 verse 6, the Lord of hosts will make for all people a feast of rich food, a feast of well aged wine, of rich food full of marrow, of aged wine, well refined.

So as Jesus is turning this water into wine, and it's not just any wine, it's not some two buck chuck.

It's not a bottle of barefoot.

This is the best wine of the night.

He is ushering in this new age as the Messiah.

This is a time of celebration.

This is a feast full of rich food, of well aged wine, wine, well refined.

This Messiah.

So we have that Old Testament reference.

Then also, we see this in in John 1 17.

It says for the law was given through Moses, grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.

So what did the law bring?

The law brought a curse.

The law brought condemnation.

The law brought a curse and condemnation.

But what Jesus brings is a blessing.

It is grace and truth.

Grace, our unmerited favor from God that hits us.

That is a blessing.

That is a blessing.

So the law condemnation comes through Moses, but grace and truth comes through Jesus Christ.

Moses brought the law, which brought condemnation.

Jesus brings grace and truth, which brings salvation.

So the Messiah comes with blessing, not curse.

Just as Jesus blessed this wedding, blessed this couple.

Then, lastly, and then we'll actually take this time to prepare for communion as well, because the next point is kind of about communion.

So I figured it was only right.

Anyways, wine was a very important element of the Israelites Passover feast.

There were four cups of Passover, four cups of wine, one, two, three, four.

And it was a very important element of the whole Passover feast.

There were moments, there were times that they had to drink from each cup.

And but at the last supper, Jesus gave the wine a new significance, right?

Because they were celebrating the Passover.

And then Jesus goes, picks up the bread.

This is my body broken for you.

Eat this in remembrance of me.

Then he takes the cup.

This is my new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you.

Drink this in remembrance of me.

And Jesus gave the wine new significance.

He made it a symbol of his own life giving blood.

And so from the very onset of his ministry, the redemption of Jesus was foreshadowed at this wedding in Cana.

We see him making wine, ushering in this new season, this new time, this celebration, the arrival of the Messiah.

And he creates wine, which then at the end of his ministry, he will take that, not that same wine, obviously.

I mean, who knows, maybe carry the bottle around.

Is that good?

That's a joke, obviously.

He takes this wine at the last supper and says, this is the new covenant in my blood.

And we can see a foreshadow all the way at the beginning of Jesus's miracles.

It's incredible.

And it's amazing.

When we dive a little bit deeper, how we can see, one, how intentional the John is, but also how interweaved the story of redemption is and how from the very beginning, God knew what he was doing.

God has been in control.

He still is in control.

Even when we try to fight it, even when we try to force our own way, God is so good, so sovereign, so above it all.

And he didn't just turn water into wine for a parlor trick.

He didn't just do it because these people were out of wine and he was worried about a lawsuit.

Although he cares about those things.

But he did it.

He did it so that his disciples would know he is the Messiah.

But also he did it to tell his story, to tell the truth that he is the Messiah, that he is the Lamb of God who will take away the sins of the world.

And it is through his life, death, and resurrection that we all get to sit and partake of the ultimate wedding feast that will be heaven, will be eternity with him.

And we get a taste of his goodness as we read the scripture.

We get a taste of that feast when we all gather together and we worship and we fellowship and we pray and we reflect on the scriptures.

And we get a taste of that here and now.

But this is just the tip of the iceberg for when Jesus will return yet again for us, his bride, whether it be in our lifetime or kids lifetime, so on and so forth.

But how great of God to bring Jesus, which would be a blessing and not a curse.
