---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 3:6-9"
date: "2024-05-19T17:13:49.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/86935601/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fproduction%2F2024-4-19%2F378087791-48000-1-289f911b7aebd.m4a"
duration: "18:34"
scripture: "Galatians 3:6-9"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: Covenant ceremonies & the gospel Genesis 12 & Genesis 15\n
guid: 09a81ef2-9949-4527-9550-df1d4eaf1fea
episode_id: 34b92dac
---

Covenant ceremonies & the gospel Genesis 12 & Genesis 15

## Transcription

In Galatians 3 this morning versus 6 through 9 is what we're really going to look at.

And then we'll be in Genesis 15 as well.

Also kind of looking at Genesis 12 and I'll mention Genesis 17.

But this morning for our reading of Galatians, let's just read chapter 3 verses 1 through 9.

Anyone who would like to read that, go on ahead.

Galatians 3 verses 1 through 9.

We'll jump in there.

Oh foolish relations, who has bewitched you?

It was before your eyes that Jesus Christ was publicly portrayed as crucified.

Let me ask you only this.

Did you receive the Spirit by works of the law or by hearing with faith?

Are you so foolish?

Having begun in the Spirit, are you now being perfected by the flesh?

Did you suffer so many things in vain, if indeed it was in vain?

Does he who supplies the Spirit to you and works miracles among you, do so by works of the law or by hearing with faith?

Just as Abraham believed God and it was counted to his righteousness.

Know then that it is those of faith who are sons of Abraham, and the scripture, for seeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying, In you shall all the nations be blessed.

So then those who are of faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith.

All right, so we will very quickly turn to Genesis 15.

And because he mentions Abraham, and it's important that we get context of what Paul is referring back to, because all of these people, the audience would have been familiar with this text, and they would have known the covenant of God to Abraham and his offspring.

I'll read this.

After these things, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision.

Fear not, Abram.

I am your shield, your reward shall be very great.

But Abram said, O Lord God, what will you give me?

For I continue childless, and the heir of my house is Eleazar of Damascus.

And Abram said, Behold, you have given me no offspring, and a member of my household will be my heir.

And behold, the word of the Lord came to him.

This man shall not be your heir, your very own son shall be your heir.

And he brought him outside and said, Look toward heaven and number the stars, if you are able to number them.

Then he said to him, So shall your offspring be.

And he believed the Lord and counted it to him as righteousness.

Hopefully that sounds familiar, because we just read that in Galatians 3.

And he said to him, I am the Lord who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to possess.

But he said, O Lord God, how am I to know that I shall possess it?

He said to him, Bring me a heifer, three years old, a female goat, three years old, a ram, three years old, a turtle dove and a young pigeon.

And he brought him all these, cut them in half and laid each half over against the other.

But he did not cut the birds in half.

And when the birds of prey came down on the carcasses, Abram drove them away.

As the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell on Abram.

And behold, dreadful and great darkness fell upon him.

Then the Lord said to Abram, Know for certain that your offspring will be sojourners in a land that is not theirs and will be servants there.

And they will be afflicted for four hundred years.

But I will bring judgment on the nation that they serve.

And afterward they shall come out with great possessions.

As for you, you shall go to your fathers in peace.

You shall be buried in a good old age and they shall come back here in the fourth generation for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet complete.

When the sun had gone down and it was dark, behold, a smoking fire pot and a flaming torch passed between these pieces.

On that day, the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, To your offspring, I give this land from the River of Egypt to the Great River of the Euphrates, the land of the Canites, the Canizites, the Cadmanites, the Hittites, the Parisites, the referendum, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Gerisheites and the Jebusites.

Genesis 15.

OK, so.

Promise of Zoe, it's mentioned there in the text.

What we missed is Genesis 12 verses two and three, where it says, And I will make of you.

This is God to Abram, who will soon become Abraham.

Same guy.

God just changes his name.

And I will make you a great nation and I will bless you and make your name great so that you will be a blessing.

I will bless those who bless you and him who dishonors you.

I will curse and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.

So then we get that reiteration in chapter 15, verse five, and he brought him outside and said, Look toward heaven and number the stars if you are able to number them.

And he said, So shall your offspring be.

So, again, God is just reminding Abram of what happened a few chapters prior.

And then we get in verse six of Galatians three.

Then Abraham, Paul says, Then Abraham believed the Lord and the Lord counted it to him as righteousness.

And Paul, Paul's argument again lies right there that Abraham's belief brought righteousness in God's sight.

It was Abraham's belief, not his actions that brought that that the Lord counted it as righteousness.

Abraham's belief brought righteousness in God's sight.

And again, Paul is drawing this argument of justification by works or by circumcision versus justification by faith alone.

And Paul says, It is those of faith who are sons of Abraham, not those of circumcision who are sons.

Because the verse that Paul quotes, verses 15, Genesis 15 six, Abraham had not yet been circumcised.

So in chapter 15, Abraham had not been circumcised yet.

That comes in chapter 17.

So Paul is going like, Hello, you foolish Galatians.

Did you not know?

Did you did you miss that when God had this interaction with Abram, he had not yet been circumcised?

So how could it have been by works that you are referring to?

He's like, you are foolish.

Did you forget the pages of scripture?

Did you like get the scroll mixed up from the very beginning?

God knew how it would go down.

And of course, like from our perspective, we have the the we now have the knowledge of Christ.

And these Galatians also would have had the knowledge of Christ.

But of course, for Abraham, right there, he's going like, OK, you're saying this is going to happen.

I believe you.

And it was Abraham's faith that he was justified, that he brought righteousness.

And it is us, the believers in Christ Jesus, that we become the righteousness of God.

And so it is Paul's drawing this argument.

And it's so important that we that we understand like this this chapter, Genesis 15.

Because we get this weird encounter of Abraham, Abram, God, and then these all these dead animals.

Right.

And if you caught that, like he cuts the animals in half and like there's all this weird stuff.

And then Abram, God puts Abram in this dark sleep.

And then there's this pot of fire that that walks between or hovers or goes between the dead animals.

And what context we don't have or quite understand is that this was a very common covenantal practice for two people, Abram and in this in this circumstance, Abram and God, that two people would walk through the dead carcasses.

And it was the the the symbolism of it is if one of you betrays the covenant, you will become like the dead animals.

You will die.

The covenant dies.

You die.

And this like this is why Paul is going like, no, Abraham had the gospel.

Why?

Because Abraham doesn't walk through the dead animals.

Abraham does not walk through the carcasses.

It was God alone that walked through the carcasses.

It was God alone that said, this is my covenant to you.

I know that you will fall short.

I know that you cannot keep this covenant.

So I'm going to put you in a deep sleep and I myself, I God, will pay the price for you.

If you're not seeing Jesus in this already, I don't I don't know how I can help you.

The promise of God, the promise of the covenant again, that his that he would have as many descendants as there are stars in the sky, that the nations would be blessed.

And of course, we have the beauty of looking back and going like, clearly this is Jesus that all the nations would be blessed.

The promise of the covenant does not rely on Abraham or his works or what he would do.

God must fulfill this covenant and promise to Abraham and his offspring.

And the blessing that God promised was not just for the Jew, but the Gentile.

Right.

You read that in Genesis 12.

All the families of Israel.

No, all the families of Abraham.

No, all the families of the earth shall be blessed.

This blessing is for all people.

And Jesus is the promised offspring of Abraham.

And Jesus's blessing is not just for the Jew, but the Gentile.

And Abraham was a man of faith.

His faith is what brought him righteousness.

And it is the same for you and for me.

Our faith in Jesus Christ, it was, is what brings us our right standing with God.

That's it.

Because it was by faith that Abraham was made righteous to God.

It was by faith and it is our faith in Jesus that brings us righteousness with God.

And Paul says that those who are of faith are blessed along with Abraham.

The man, woman of faith.

That faith comes before works.

And so often we try to let our works prove our faith or works earn our faith.

And it was the same thing for the Galatians.

Going like, hey, you are asking and requesting and telling people that their circumcision, that their acts are what saves them.

But let me remind you for how our faith began.

Let me remind you with Abraham that his faith was what counted him as righteous to God.

Not his circumcision because he wasn't even circumcised yet.

And so for us, we have to remember that it is our faith in Jesus.

That we have a relationship with Jesus that brings us the relationship with Jesus.

It's not us looking a certain way, acting a certain way.

It is our faith in Jesus that brings us into the family of God.

That bridges the gap between us and God, our faith in the works of Jesus Christ.

So let us not be foolish Galatians.

Let us not culture or our works bewitch us.

Let us be rooted and grounded in scripture.

Let us know scripture.

Know that the gospel message, that the good news of Jesus Christ, that it starts with our bad news, that we were far from God.

That our sins have pitted us against God.

But through the work, the life, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, him being the perfect sacrifice, him being the blessing, him being the promised offspring.

It is through him and him alone that we can find new life and faith and hope and joy.

And that from that place of love, joy, peace, we can attain those things.

Just as Abraham believed, believed God and it was counted to him as righteousness.

Know then that it is those of faith who are the sons of Abraham.

In the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preach the gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying, in you shall all the nations be blessed.

So then those who are of faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith.

Let us be men and women of faith and be blessed because of our faith, not because of our works.

Let's pray.

Jesus, we thank you for your word.

We thank you that it is truth.

God, we thank you that through the dead animal carcasses split in half.

We thank you that you put man to sleep.

We thank you that you put Abram to sleep.

We thank you that you alone walked through the carcasses, but still creating a covenant with Abram and now a covenant with us, saying that you alone would be on the hook, that you alone would be on the line for providing for this covenantal relationship.

We thank you that your son Jesus lived a perfect life, died a sinner's death, and was raised to life again, defeating death and the grave, giving me, giving every single one of us the opportunity for new life, for salvation in him.

What a beautiful and rich example in the text from the beginning of time, showing us that you would do it alone.

Thank you for protecting us from ourselves.

And God, may you wake us up.

May we not be foolish Galatians who try to earn our salvation.

God, may we be blessed by our faith, by our belief that you are the Son of God, that you have done it all.

We thank you for the beauty of Scripture, the beauty of your word.

God, you are so good.

We thank you.

It's in your name.

Amen.
