---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 4:1-7"
date: "2024-06-16T17:21:00.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/88091478/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fproduction%2F2024-5-16%2F380825036-48000-1-af94129ff0516.m4a"
duration: "25:41"
scripture: "Galatians 4:1-7"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: Adoption is cool.\n
guid: dc563c33-f7fa-4cf0-8459-104227f68fdb
episode_id: dee03f9a
---

## Transcription

Just so we get a little more context, let's start at reading chapter 3 verse 15 and then we'll read all of chapter 4.

And that should be just fine.

If anyone would like to read.

To give a human example brothers, even with a man-made covenant, no one annuls it or adds to it once it has been ratified.

Now the promises were made to Abraham and to his offspring.

It does not say, and to offsprings, referring to many, but referring to one and to your offspring, who is Christ.

This is what I mean.

The law, which came 430 years afterward, does not annul a covenant previously ratified by God so as to make the promise void.

For if the inheritance comes by the law, it no longer comes by promise, but God gave it to Abraham by a promise.

Why then the law?

It was added because of transgressions, until the offspring should come to whom the promise had been made, and it was put in place through angels by an intermediary.

Now an intermediary implies more than one, but God is one.

Is the law then contrary to the promises of God?

Certainly not.

If a law had been given that could give life, then righteousness would indeed be by the law.

But the scripture imprisoned everything under sin, so that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.

Now before faith came, we were held captive under the law, imprisoned until the coming faith would be revealed.

So then the law was our guardian until Christ came, in order that we would not be justified by faith.

But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian.

For in Christ Jesus you are all sons of God through faith, for as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.

There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is no male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus.

And if you are Christ's, then you are Abraham's offspring, heirs according to promise.

I mean that the heir as long as he is a child is no different from a slave, though he is But he is under guardians and managers until the date set by his father.

In the same way we also when we were children were enslaved to the elementary principles of the world, but when the fullness of time had come, God sent forth his son, born of women, born under the law, to redeem those who were under the law, so that we might receive adoption as sons.

And because you are sons, God has sent the spirit of his son into our hearts crying, So you are no longer a slave but a son, and if a son, then an heir through God.

Formerly when you did not know God, you were enslaved those that by nature are not gods.

But now that you have come to know God, or rather to be known by God, how can you turn back again to the weak and worthless elementary principles of the world, whose slaves you want to be once more?

You have served days and months and seasons and years.

I am afraid I may have labored over you in vain.

Brothers, I entreat you, become as I am, for I also have become as you are.

You did me no wrong.

You know it was because of a bodily ailment that I preached the gospel to you at first, and though my condition was a trial to you, you did not squander to despise me, but receive me as an angel of God, as Christ Jesus.

What then has become of your blessedness?

For I testify to you that, if possible, you would have gouged your eyes out and given them to me.

Have I then become your enemy by telling you the truth?

They make much of you, but for no good purpose.

They want to shut you out, that you may make much of them.

It is always good to be made much of for a good purpose.

And not only when I am present with you, my little children, for whom I am again in the anguish of childbirth until Christ is formed in you, I wish I could present you, I wish I could be present with you now, and change my tone, for I am perplexed about you.

Tell me, you who desire to be under the law, do you not listen to the law?

For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by a slave woman and one by a free woman.

But the son of the slave was born according to the flesh, while the son of the free woman was born through a promise.

Now this may be interpreted allegorically.

These women are two covenants.

One is from Mount Sinai, bearing children for slavery.

She is Hagar.

Now Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia.

She corresponds to present Jerusalem, for she is in slavery with her children.

But the Jerusalem above is free, and she is our mother.

For it is written, Rejoice, O barren one who does not bear, break forth and cry aloud, you who are not in labor.

For the children of the desolate one will be more than those of the one who has a husband.

Now you, brothers, like Isaac, are children of promise.

But just as at that time, he who was born according to the flesh persecuted him who was born according to the spirit.

So also it is now.

But what does scripture say?

Cast out the slave woman and her son, for the son of the slave woman shall not inherit with the son of the free woman.

So brothers, we are not children of the slave, but of the free woman.

How about that?

So Paul is really building on the imagery that he started towards the end of chapter 3.

And he's developing on this idea of the tutor, or as we read, the guardian.

And Paul explains that as long as an heir is a child, he is no different than a slave.

So even though a young child might be the heir to an empire, he must remain under the guardianship of a tutor, or he must remain under the guardian because of his younger age or immaturity until the father decides that the time has come for his son to become independent.

So the child is not free, even though he is an heir of the promise.

And so now Paul is connecting this analogy of both the slave and the child are enslaved.

And he's connecting this analogy to Israel's existence under the law, verse 3.

In the same way, we also, when we were children, were enslaved to the elementary principles of this world.

So he's connecting the guardian to the tutor from a few paragraphs ago and to the enslavement of the elementary principles.

So Paul is just kind of connecting all the dots, and he's also making a point here to the Jews saying that to the Jew, their enslavement was to Mosaic law, their enslavement was to the law, but to the Gentile, their enslavement is to the world.

So either way you cut it, when you're looking at Jew, Gentile, you're a slave.

You're a slave to the law or you're a slave to the world.

So whether you're a Jew or a Gentile, you are a slave.

But verse 4, when the fullness of time had come, God sent forth his son, born of woman, born under the law to redeem those who were under the law so that we might receive adoption as sons.

Okay, let's work through this.

The fullness of time.

So from the very beginning of time, God promised, as the kids learned last week, a snake crusher.

God promised a snake crusher, one who would, quoting from Genesis chapter 3, the man would strike or would smash, would crush the snake, although he would bite his heel.

So that's what happens, the snake bites his heel, but in the end the snake gets crushed.

That's Jesus, right?

The bite would be the death of Jesus, but he didn't stay bitten, to write along the analogy.

He crushes the snake through resurrection.

So that's the promise of Jesus.

Snake crusher, promise offspring, right?

We get to Abraham, the promised offspring, who would be a blessing to the whole world.

So the fullness of time.

And Jesus, he says in Mark 1, 14 and 15, Jesus says the second part, but Jesus came into the Galilee proclaiming the gospel of God and saying the words of Jesus, the time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God is at hand, repent and believe in the gospel.

So Paul wouldn't have had these words of Jesus, but Paul and Jesus are saying the same thing.

The time has come, the time is fulfilled, as Jesus said.

And what does Paul write in Galatians?

Although this wouldn't have been written down yet, maybe, but it hadn't been distributed yet, whatever.

I don't know the full timeline here.

The thought being they didn't collaborate on this idea that Jesus was the fullness of time.

So Jesus says the time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God is at hand.

Paul says to the church in Galatians, when the fullness of time had come, referring to Jesus, God sent forth his son.

So Paul is attributing and saying that Jesus is God's son.

That's good.

Born of a woman, right?

And of course, back in those days, as we see in the synoptic gospels, two of them, in Matthew and in Luke, we see the lineage of Jesus and or to Jesus.

And that's not necessarily a generation to generation to generational thing.

But it really it was like markers.

It was like, OK, this person is it's tracking the line all the way to Jesus.

And Mary was in that line.

And so Paul's making the point here.

Born of a woman, born under the law.

That's a big idea, because as we talked about in our catechism, he needed to be under the law.

He needed to be under the weight of the law so that he could break the weight of the law.

So it's important that Jesus was under the law.

And Paul is making this distinction exactly for that point.

If Jesus was not under the law, then he wouldn't have been able to break the chains of the law because he wouldn't be under that to redeem those who are under the law so that we might receive adoption as sons.

So born of the law.

So Jesus came just at the right time.

Then, as we just read, so that we might receive adoption as sons.

And this is really the main idea of this of this passage that we're looking at today, that we might receive adoption as sons.

And Paul's been playing with the idea that we are heirs, right?

We have the sons inheritance, as we talked about last week, and now that we might receive adoption.

And from our perspective, adoption as we think of it, like it might carry this feeling or this weight of abandonment or of unwantedness or of brokenness.

But when we look at the flip of that, for every unwanted child who is adopted, there is a set of adoptive parents who specifically chose that child.

They chose them regardless of the cost or of challenges involved.

They gave them their family name and granted her full rights as a member of their family.

When Kayla and I were in San Diego, we had this family in our church and we were a church plant in this little inland town called Rancho Bernardo.

And there was a family who started in this church and they were a family of 12, 12 or 13.

And half of their kids were adopted.

And we were at dinner with them one time because their kids were in the student ministry.

Half of them were in the student ministry.

And then there were a couple who were who were right behind them.

And so we were at dinner and we were hearing one of the adoption stories and how they the lengths they went to to get their children.

And they were from their kids were from Africa.

One was from Sierra Leone.

He lived through Ebola.

Now he's a college football player, which is pretty cool.

But he they like they got to they went to this city and they had to like catch three different flights and of course didn't speak the language.

And it was just just cost upon cost upon cost upon like working with government.

And the whole process was like years long.

Like it went like I think for one of their one of their kids, it was like a four or five year process just for them to get the child.

They're going through this whole process and they end up flying to Africa to get the kid.

And then they like it became a point where there was like one flight for them to get out and they almost didn't make the flight.

And like it was this just this chaotic scene.

And but they they got to the orphanage where one of the kids was and they found out they had siblings.

And then they're like, bring the siblings.

Like they just they their their perspective was whatever the cost, whatever it like one, we're not going to break up these kids.

But also they were like, we we have to do this.

And I as I was looking at this passage and thinking of this idea of adoption, the lengths that this family went to get their children.

And then I think about our Heavenly Father and the lengths he went to for us.

And adoption is just such a beautiful picture of the gospel that to the world, we may be worthless to politicians or the elite.

We may seem like pawns in their scheme to get rich, to take over the world, whatever it might be.

But we have a father who would do whatever it took to get us, who would send his one and only son so that whoever would believe in him would not perish but have eternal life.

Right.

This this beautiful theme of of this of this father who wants us and desires us.

And from the beginning of time, we see how we messed it all up.

And yet God chose his people.

God chose his son.

And now we have the opportunity to be in his family and to grant full rights to his to his honor and to his empire and to his his his inheritance.

And this is the theme of this passage, how God adopts a sinful and rebellious people and grants them the rights and privileges of sons.

So Paul is centering our attention on the work of Jesus and the one of the many benefits that Jesus brings our adoption as God's children.

Then the verse continues.

And because you are sons, God has sent the spirit of his son into our hearts, crying Abba, father.

So you are no longer a slave, but a son.

And if a son, then you are an heir through God.

By God's grace, through the work of Jesus, which is received by faith alone, God has sent us his Holy Spirit into our hearts and brings about our adoption.

And if we are adopted as God's sons, then we no longer know God as judge, but only as our father.

And if we know God as father, then we can cry out to him for our every need.

And Paul says we can cry Abba, father, which is a term of intimacy, a term of closeness, a term of endearment.

Right.

Like I can cry out Abba, father.

I can call out to my heavenly father who so knows me and who so loves me.

And Paul is contrasting these two realities, the reality of son versus the reality of slave, the freedom and divine sonship that we have through faith, through faith in Jesus versus the bondage and alienation that we have in our attempts to secure salvation through our obedience.

He explains that the Galatians are no longer slaves, meaning that they were imprisoned under the law, but they are God's sons.

And if they are God's sons, then they are heirs of the covenant promise that God made to Abraham, whether Jew or Gentile, slave or free, male or female.

And so Paul's making this contradiction.

You're not a slave anymore.

You're a son.

And since you are a son, then you are an heir through God.

So orphans own nothing.

They have rights to very little, if anything at all.

But when orphans are adopted by loving parents, legally, they now have a family.

Their status changes, a new last name and an inheritance.

The orphan is no longer an orphan.

Everything that is true of that adopted orphan is even more true of the person who is saved and adopted by God.

And that is good news for you and good news for me.

Good news for the believer that we have a new family, a perfect father, and an eternal inheritance.

We have been adopted by God.

Now, and we kind of touched on this a little bit last week, but I think this is kind of part, this is the difficult part of this idea of adoption.

And I think we see this now even through like real world adoption is that you might be adopted.

Your last name might change, but the process of discovering and living in your adopted identity is the issue that I think most believers face because we want to live in our own way.

We want to live in our own thing.

We want to be, we want to write our own story.

And for us to live in the adoption, for us to live in the inheritance, for us to live in the finished work of Jesus, we have to, and now I'm feeling like a broken record from last week, but we have to transform our mind.

And that transformation of mind does not come from our own power.

It does not come from our own strength.

It comes from resting in the finished work of our father.

How else do you learn your new identity by other than spending time with your creator?

How else do you learn how to act, how to live, how to be, because you want to, we want to operate and live in our, I don't know if you guys have seen the new Wonka movie, but there's this character in there and she's adopted and adopted the, adopt, or I guess she's an orphan and the foster parents, if you will, say she has orphan syndrome.

And I think we so often live in that orphan syndrome where we think we think we are still in chains.

We think we are still of this world and we try to work and we try to fight and we try to do it on, on our own, earn it on our own.

And yet, we are free.

We have been freed from not only the rule of the law, but also the, the rule of the world on our lives and in our lives.

And we have to fight to get the orphan syndrome out of us.

And it is not a fight that is won through flesh and blood.

It is a spiritual fight in a, and a fight that only happens through resting in the finished work of Jesus and learning from your father, learning from your heavenly father, and God has so graciously given us, whether that be a therapist or people in our life who can help lead us and guide us in those ways.

Also the, the word of God that never returns void, that is sharper than any double-edged sword.

And we have this ability through the power of the Holy Spirit to transform our minds, to no longer live under the rule and reign of this world, the rule and of the law.

And we need to fight our own thoughts and minds to know that you are not that person anymore.

You are a free son and daughter of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

You are a free son and daughter of Jesus.

And we must take on his mind and take on his, his thoughts of who we are, of who we are in him.

We must take on his thoughts and his, his minds that we are his sons and daughters.

And I, that we are not, that we can approach him with confidence as it says in Hebrews, that we can approach his throne with confidence knowing that we are his sons and daughters and we can learn from him and he can do the transformation in through us.

And it doesn't have to be you all on your own.

It doesn't have to be me all on my own, but through his spirit at work in us, through the people that he is put around us, we can work, we can rest in Jesus while also learning and growing more about him so that we can put on and take on his perspective of not only the world, but of ourselves.

And yeah, adoption is not just a change of on the exterior, although that's great.

Like being saved from hell is great, but there's also an adoption that needs to take place in our minds and we must mind, body, soul, and spirit all be transformed by the word of God and through his people.

And so, a beautiful passage as we continue on this idea of being heirs of God, being inheriting the son's inheritance and understanding our adoption to sonship, our adoption into the family of God.

And that's amazing and beautiful.
