---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 5:16-18"
date: "2024-07-28T18:02:01.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/89812114/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-6-29%2F5aed4d39-9965-4e54-3fb3-ca8294aaf315.m4a"
duration: "13:53"
scripture: "Galatians 5:16-18"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: We had a recording malfunction so call this a re-do! 

guid: a7af9a7c-64de-48a2-9af1-4ed38a097e22
episode_id: 93439011
---

We had a recording malfunction so call this a re-do!

## Transcription

So, we had an issue yesterday and my voice memo didn't record and so I'm coming to you on a Monday and going to give you a quick synopsis of the message because I love ya and because we can.

We are looking at Galatians chapter 5 verses 16 through 18 and it says, But I say, walk by the Spirit, and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh.

For the desires of the flesh are against the Spirit, and the desires of the Spirit are against the flesh.

For these are opposed to each other, to keep you from doing the things you want to do.

But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.

As I was doing my study for yesterday, I came across the depth and references of Paul using these words, walk by the Spirit.

These words are not just fun words that Paul used.

Paul was trying to connect a primary Jewish audience back to Israel and their exile from Pharaoh all the way back in Exodus.

And when we look back to Israel's desert experience, we can see how they were led by the Spirit and walked by the Spirit.

Of course, the Spirit would have been the cloud by day, the pillar of fire by night.

The provision from the Spirit would have been the manna and quail for eating, and sometimes water in the desert for drinking.

And we can see this obviously in the story all the way back in Exodus, but we can also see this in references from Isaiah, Isaiah chapter 63, as well as Nehemiah 9, 19 through 20.

I'll read this Nehemiah 1 very quickly.

God did not forsake them in the wilderness.

Pretty cool.

So as we can see how God was with them in their Exodus and when Paul references walk by the Spirit, when we read that in context, but I say walk by the Spirit and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh, we can kind of see a completely different context.

We have this imagery of the Israelites in their wandering quote unquote in the desert.

They weren't wandering as much as I mean, they were wandering some because of their disobedience, but that's another message for another time.

But we see that God was present with them.

And so when Paul references walk by the Spirit and we have this imagery of a pillar, a fire at night and a cloud by day, and the Israelites were literally, if the cloud would move, they would pack up their encampment and move to wherever the cloud was.

There was a clear distinction of walking and following in the Spirit.

And so, but the funny thing is, is even as they had this physical example, this tangible thing to look to of the presence of God, the temptation for the Israelites was still to return to the bondage of Egypt, right?

They wanted to go back to the vegetation and go back to what was familiar even though they were enslaved under Pharaoh.

And the temptation of the Galatians was to return to the bondage of the Mosaic covenant.

And Paul in his brilliance, of course, did not want them to look within themselves to find the willpower to deny themselves.

Instead, Paul is instructing them to look to the Spirit.

And he says in verse 17, And so Paul, after painting this picture of ancient Israel, is telling the Israelites, or sorry, is telling the Galatian Jews to not desire the flesh, but to desire the Spirit.

For the desires of the flesh are against the Spirit and the desires of the Spirit are against the flesh.

And these are opposed to each other.

These two realms, if you will, the flesh and the Spirit are completely antithetical.

They are completely opposed.

They are in complete disagreement.

There is nothing that is similar of these two things.

And Paul, earlier in Galatians, chapter 1, presented the present evil age, which is the flesh, which is our current reality.

And there is a new creation that is to come and is coming in Jesus Christ.

And each age, of course, is marked by different conduct.

The present evil age is marked by sexual immorality, impurities, sensuality, idolatries, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, envy, drunkenness, orgies, and the like, as Paul calls it in Galatians 5, verses 19 through 21.

And then there is the age to come.

And this time that has come through the work of Jesus and the outpouring of the Spirit, and this age is marked by love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control.

And so for all of these reasons, then, Paul establishes in verse 18, but if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.

And so the Galatians were freed from the bondage of the law and from the dominion of Satan, And they were freed, as Jeremiah tells us, and as we have the law of God written on our hearts.

And Paul wanted the Galatians to know that the power to manifest the fruit of the Spirit did not come from themselves, but from Jesus and the Holy Spirit.

And it is for freedom that Christ has set us free.

So stand firm.

Do not return to the yoke of slavery, which is the law, and do not move forward in your freedom to lawlessness, but look to Jesus.

Look heavenward to Christ, who is seated in heavenly places, and rely on the Spirit.

Then they would manifest his fruit.

And so Paul's point, although what may seem like hard to live out, it is simple, and it is seek the Spirit in order to love.

As simple as this message is, it is important to note that a person can seek Christ and the Spirit in how a person can seek Christ and the Spirit.

Paul was writing to people in an age where often people would look to finding God from within, look to finding God everywhere, and look to finding God in all things.

And Paul was specifying that we must look to the Spirit, walk by the Spirit, and not attached to ourselves, because the tendency for these people might be to seek Christ from within or from elsewhere, or to look to finding God in all things.

And so to cut off this temptation, Paul instructs them to look back to the Israel of old, who looked to the Spirit to follow the cloud, to follow the fire.

Beautiful, really beautiful.

God did not redeem Israel from Egypt, drop them in the desert, and leave them to fend for themselves.

Although the Israelites love to accuse God of doing so, those were false accusations he provided for their every need.

He led them by the cloud of the Spirit, and when the Spirit moved, Israel was supposed to follow.

Israel did not need a map, they simply had to walk in the Spirit.

When Israel was hungry, God gave them manna to eat, and when they were thirsty, God gave them water to drink.

And these are fulfillments and shadows that have arrived through Jesus.

God redeemed us from under the bondage of the law and the dominion of Satan, sin and death, and though we enter the age to come by faith in Jesus, we still now today pilgrim in the wilderness amid our present evil age.

But just as God did for Israel of old, God provides for our every need.

God feeds us with the manna from heaven, which is Jesus who said, I am the bread of life.

Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness and are dead.

This is the bread which comes down from heaven, that one may eat of it and not die.

I am the living bread which came down from heaven.

If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever, and the bread that I shall give is my flesh, which I shall give for the life of the world.

That's John chapter 6.

God quenches our thirst with living water.

Again, John says the words of Jesus, but whoever drinks of the water that I shall give him will never thirst, but the water that I shall give him will become in him a fountain of water springing up into everlasting life.

John chapter 4.

The water that Christ gives us is the Holy Spirit.

Jesus said in the words of Jesus in the book of John chapter 7, He who believes in me as the scripture I have said, out of his heart will flow rivers of living water.

Of course, even that is a callback to the Old Testament.

The prophet Ezekiel who gave this imagery of the temple and there being an outpouring of a river coming from the temple which is a foreshadowing of the Spirit to come, and Jesus saying this is connecting those beautiful imagery there.

The apostle John adds his comment to this, but this he spoke concerning the Spirit whom those believing in him would receive, for the Holy Spirit was not yet given because Jesus was not yet glorified.

So John when he is remembering these times and events and is writing down the words of Jesus, he puts in his own thoughts and says that the Spirit was to come whom those believing in him would receive, for the Holy Spirit was not yet given because Jesus was not yet glorified.

So he is saying that Jesus when he became glorified, then Acts chapter 2 comes and John is writing this a wee bit after and so he has seen this, heard this, was there for it and now is writing this saying that it happened and that Jesus foretold this to come.

So if all these things are true, then we can rest assured that God has provided the sustenance that we need for our pilgrimage through the wilderness of this present evil age.

We do not have to go on wandering about looking for Christ in the Spirit because Jesus has indwelled us through the Holy Spirit and has given us his written word.

We can seek Christ in the Spirit, we can walk in the Spirit and seek him through the means of grace.

Beautiful.

We have been freed from the power of Satan, sin and death by the life, death and resurrection of Jesus and now Jesus is our great shepherd and he is leading us through the wilderness on the last and final exodus.

Christ leads us by the presence of the Holy Spirit like Israel of old being led by the cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night.

In our pilgrimage to the heavenly Jerusalem to come, we must be led by the Holy Spirit.

We are prone to wander and at times we even try to return to the bondage from which we have been redeemed.

But our call is to walk in the Spirit therefore and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.

Amen.

Thank you for checking this out in a quicker and a little more condensed time of our Sunday teaching.

If you like this format a little better, let me know and we can figure it out.

Either way, thanks for tuning in, love you guys, take care, hope to see you Sunday.
