---
layout: sermon
title: John 5:1-15
date: 2024-11-24T18:03:40.000Z
category: sermon
audio_url: https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/94943584/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-10-25%2F390456055-44100-2-20278718ee409.m4a
duration: 30:10
scripture: John 5:1-15
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: "Jesus at the Pool"
guid: cbef7586-e4b7-4b7e-8a65-fb712cff42e1
episode_id: 6ca38c09
---


## Transcription

So cheesy sword who says that these days?

John chapter 5.

And let's just read through.

Let's just read through the first 17 verses just for just for time's sake.

After this there was a feast of the Jews and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

Now there is in Jerusalem by the sheep gate a pool in Aramic called Bethesda, which has five roofed colonnades and these lay a multitude of invalids blind, lame and paralyzed.

One man was there who had been invalid for 38 years when Jesus saw him lying there and knew that he had already been there a long time.

He said to him, do you want to be healed?

The sick man answered him, sir, I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up and while I'm going and while I am going another steps down before me.

Jesus said to him, get up, take your bed and walk and at once the man was healed and he took up his bed and walked.

Now that day was the Sabbath.

So the Jews said to the man who has been healed, it is the Sabbath and is not lawful for you to take up your bed.

But he answered them, the man who healed me, the man that said to me, take up your bed and walk.

They asked him who is the man who said to you take up your bed and walk.

Now the man who had been healed did not know who it was for Jesus had withdrawn and as there was a crowd in the place afterward Jesus found him in the temple and said to him, see you are well, send on more that nothing worse may happen to you.

The man went away and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had healed him.

And this was why the Jews were persecuting Jesus because he was doing these things on the Sabbath.

But Jesus answered them, my father is working until now and I am working.

Awesome.

So if you remember all the way back to when we opened up this series, we talked about how John is kind of sectioned out into a couple sections.

Of course, started with the prologue those first 18 verses in John chapter 1 and then it kind of enters into Jesus's ministry to outward to the people.

And then the last sort of chunk is Jesus's ministry ministering to his disciples and then it sort of turns into the passion.

And we kind of have a bit shift here in this chunk of scripture and in about John chapter 5 to John chapter 7 these next three chapters where things were just kind of like cordial with Jesus and now we're getting to a point where there will be like straight-up opposition where Jesus himself is starting to get a little more bold a little more rambunctious if you will and then the opposition to that to Jesus sort of revealing more of who he is.

There is a lot there's a lot more butting of heads.

So we just kind of we read the beginning of this conversation and the story of this of this man being healed and we see this first controversy with the Sabbath and then as we continue to read through chapter 5 chapter 6 chapter 7 we will see some of his disciples leave him none of the 12 yet, but the other sort of gaggle of people who were with Jesus they start to leave him and start start to flee and are like maybe this guy's a little too radical for me.

And then Jesus is charged with demon possession later in these next three chapters.

They try to arrest him and in the midst of all of this Jesus continues to reveal who he is that he is the son of God that he is the Messiah which of course just the religious elite cannot stand which turns us back to the beginning of this all where we see Jesus after this of course he's referring to his time there in in the in the northern area around the Sea of Galilee and he heals that man's son and after this there was a feast at the Jews.

It doesn't tell us which one there is sort of argument on which one it is which one it could be.

Doesn't really matter.

There were lots of feasts and so there were lots of times where people would go down to Jerusalem and anyways, He's there in Jerusalem and it talks about this sheep gate at a pool called Bethesda and which has five roofed colonnades and we actually have some pretty like we I brought some pictures for us to show of the pool.

But first I think it's the first one is the picture of yet the actual location.

So if you see the top right it says the pool of Bethesda so you can see there is the temple and how close in proximity the pool of Bethesda was to the temple and then if we go to the next one that little towards the bottom sort of center there that nice little archway peak that is one of the five colonnades that people would go down to and that's where all of the invalids would be right.

So if it says that they were blind lame paralyzed.

And so that's where they would be that's that was one of the entrances to those two pools and which takes us to verse 5 where one man was there who had been an invalid for 38 years and when Jesus saw him lying there and knew that he had already been there a long time of course 38 years is a long time.

And we can think about it.

That's like a long time to be dependent on others.

We don't know if he's actually 38 years old how this whole thing came about.

We don't know that but that's a long time to be dependent on other people caring for you.

That's a long time for you to get used to being carried being brought around I'm sure it would be nice.

I'm sure we all at one point or another would like to be carried around.

It's funny.

I was even thinking back to just my last stint where I tore my Achilles and I would get driven places.

Josh in fact would be my chauffeur for a lot of that time and it was kind of nice just hanging around relaxing not worrying.

I can't I can't do anything.

I can't really go anywhere.

I can't do anything on my own volition.

So I'm just I'm just down.

I'm we're going with the flow, you know, and so this guy is there and sure.

He's at these healing waters, which I guess sort of leads to the question.

How did these waters heal?

And before we find an answer could somebody read verse 4 for me to me verse 4?

Gotcha.

Gotcha.

Sorry.

I just had to do it.

It's fun.

Yep.

So you might see it in your footnotes if you have it some minute.

So I have the footnotes here in my Bible.

It said some manuscripts verse 4.

It says waiting for the moving of the water.

Here he goes for an angel of the Lord went down at certain seasons in the pool and stirred the water whoever stepped in first after the stir after the stirring of the water was healed of whatever disease he had.

So it was believed that an angel would come down and stick its toe in the water stir it up and then whoever got in the water first was healed.

That's what was believed.

It doesn't have it in there because it's in some manuscripts and not in others.

And so there's just some it's one of those things stuff for discussion.

So that's what was believed and so which we can kind of see in the conversation that's to be had that that's what was believed.

Obviously there were many invalids there.

And so Jesus asked this man again verse 6 do you want to be healed?

And the sick man answered him sir.

I have no one to put me in to the pool when the water is stirred up and while I'm going another steps down before me.

And I've always read this question as a no duh.

He wants to be healed.

He's at the waters, but I think it is a fair question being that this man had been paralyzed for a very long time and again, like I had already said he was used to that treatment and him not being paralyzed mean he would have to work.

He would have to fend for himself.

He would no longer have the luxury of people coming to him bringing him food bringing him water bringing him.

Whatever he needed.

He would no longer have that luxury because he would be able bodied and able to participate in society.

And so it is a very fair question that Jesus asked him.

Do you want to be healed?

And then he answers like I have no one to take me to these waters like and again, this is kind of a theme that we see.

Of course, no one is expecting Jesus to be the Messiah whether it we go all the way back to John chapter 3 with the conversation with Nicodemus.

Am I supposed to get back into my mother's womb or the woman at the well?

Where is this water that you speak of?

And now we see I cannot get to these waters below here at the pool when I try like by the time I call my uber for them to pick me up and take me to the well or take me to the waters that are stirred somebody else beats me there.

Right.

And so this guy he's like just obviously thinking in the natural and then Jesus just simply says to him.

Get up take your bed and walk.

Symbol is that right.

It's like at once verse 9 says the man was healed and he took up his bed and walked like just sort of like happens, you know, like just kind of crazy.

He's just like there one second Jesus asked him a question.

He gives him kind of a normal answer and then Jesus like get up dude.

Take your bed and walk.

And yes, the bed he was sleeping on was probably some sort of like roll-up mat that was made out of reeds and probably like similar to like a thin cheap like camping mattress that you take with you that hope, you know, you hope just gives a little bit of comfort.

So you don't have a have a stick in your back while you sleep on the ground.

Right.

It's probably one of those thin roll-up ones and he obeyed Jesus commands and not only like did he roll up his bed, but then he stood up and walked like first of all.

We've all here seen a child learn to walk this guy for 38 years did not walk.

What did that look like?

Did he have like jello legs?

Like what was like going on with this guy?

Is he walking like how does it look?

What was I'm just curious of the scene like, you know, this guy like does he get to his knees and like rolls up the mat and then he like stands up and he's like they like work.

Does he like click his heels?

Like we don't we don't know what happens with this guy, but he stands up and walks and then now verse 9 continues now that day was Sabbath.

So the Jews and again, it just says the Jews, but it's most likely referring to the the Jewish religious officials and leaders.

The rabbis, the Pharisees, the teachers.

So the Jews said to the man who had been healed it is the Sabbath and it is not lawful for you to take up your bed.

Okay, so now we know that the Old Testament had forbidden work on the Sabbath, right?

Like even going back to the Ten Commandments.

Remember the Sabbath day keep it holy right supposed to be a day of rest.

And we so we have that in written law.

We have that in the in the Pentateuch in the Torah in the first five books of the Bible.

But what is this like work supposed to be and it would seem to be like your typical job, right?

Don't do your your job like take a day of rest take a day of off from your normal work and be you know worship spend time with family, right?

That would be kind of the I would say just a very loose.

Definition and loose interpretation of of that command.

But according to the rabbis and their historical interpretation of the law, they said that they had categorized that there were 39 different types of work that they said for this one for the commandment of of not working of resting.

Of remembering the Sabbath day and one of the works that they categorized in that extra list of 39 was that you could not take or carry anything from one place to another except for cases of compassion such as carrying a paralytic.

So.

The rabbis they taught and it was the Jews they have the written law and then they have an oral law, which is funny enough now it's written down.

And so the oral law the oral tradition the oral sort of interpretation of the written law.

They had these list of 39 types of work.

What's it?

What is this kind of work?

What is it?

And they have this list of 39 and one of the types of work was taking or carrying anything from one place to another.

Except for cases of compassion such as carrying a paralytic and so when this now healed man is carrying his Max.

After being healed which to me, I mean they already put a caveat in there except for cases of compassion.

So just carrying a paralytic.

He just was a paralytic carrying something.

So I think you could you could work your way around this oral law this added law this yeah, it seems like a gray area right like I was paralyzed and now I'm carrying a mat.

I think I think I'm kosher.

Anyways, so as a result of that added human rule the Jews reacted the way that they did.

So instead of seeing a healed man and like.

Again, we saw the picture these pools were very close to the temple.

So we could roughly assume that the Jews the religious leaders and officials they probably swung by the pool every now and then they probably were familiar with the people who were at the pool waiting to be healed.

In fact, we could almost probably like safely say that some of the teachers some of the Pharisees probably helped the person or two get into the pool like we saw how close it was to the temple.

We we we know that there are such cases of compassion.

We know the how the rabbis and how the teachers and the Pharisees were supposed to be in work and operate so we could we could assume that they were familiar with these people.

And instead of seeing this healed man, they saw a man carrying a mat.

They saw a man who was breaking their oral law.

Which in the case of the healed man.

He's like, won't you just see me for who I am?

I can walk like, you know, I can walk.

Like, you know, but the Jews were so caught up in their rules that they had added to the law that they were more concerned with this man's disobedience to their own tradition than with rejoicing and glorifying God for the man's incredible deliverance from suffering.

Verse 11, right, but he answered them because they had just asked him.

Why are you?

Why are you holding a mat?

Answer them.

The man who healed me that man said to me take up your bed and walk.

So essentially he's going like he's pulling a shaggy.

It wasn't me, right?

He's like, he's like, I'm not I didn't.

The only reason I'm carrying this mat is because the man who healed me told me to pick up my mat and so like don't get mad at me for just I'm just following orders, right?

I'm just doing what they told me to do.

He's like, I've been at this pool for a long time.

I couldn't walk.

Some guy came up to me told me to pick up my mat and walk and I did what he said.

I picked up my mat and walked.

I couldn't walk for 38 years.

And now I'm walking.

Look at me.

Like just go figure that out for yourself.

I'm I'm chilling.

And they asked him who is the man verse 12 who is the man who said to you take up your mat and walk now the man who had been healed did not know that it was Jesus for Jesus had withdrawn.

As there was a crowd in that place.

So now the Jews are asking who healed him and he's like, I forgot to ask his name.

I was busy using my legs for the first time.

And that same moment like Jesus he like throws on his invisibility cloak and like is like just got out of there quick.

There were crowds coming and again, remember there were the pools were close to the temple.

And so it was probably a busy area and it was Sabbath.

So there were people visiting their loved ones who were at this pool bringing them food bring, you know, whatever and carrying things for the paralyzed.

And so it got busy and then verse 14 continues afterward.

Jesus found him in the temple and said to him see you are well.

Sin no more that nothing worse may happen to you.

The man went away and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had healed him.

Again, we don't know if this man was paralyzed from something or something he did or why he was paralyzed.

But regardless Jesus gives him some good advice.

Don't sin.

And yeah, don't sin before worse things happen to you.

Right?

Jesus like, like, sin no more.

And how does this man thank Jesus?

By going back to the Jews and making sure that he was right in their eyes.

Did you notice that John doesn't mention he came to believe in Jesus?

Again, what's the whole purpose of John's gospel that that that you might believe and by believing you might have life in his name.

And so as John is sort of writing and creating this whole case for us and for all who would read it, it is under the pretense and purpose of belief.

And we look back to John 4 and how the man's how the official son was healed and by believing and by the healing of Jesus.

And so what we could take from that is he cared more about the healing of Jesus than he cared about the healing of Jesus.

And so what we could take from that is he cared more about the healing of Jesus than he cared about the healing of Jesus.

And so what we could take from that is he cared more about the healing of Jesus than he cared about the healing of Jesus.

And so what we could take from that is he cared more about the opinion of the rabbis and the Pharisees and the Sadducees.

He cared more about their opinion and answering to them than believing in the one who just healed him after being paralyzed for 38 years.

He received the incredible blessing of healing, but he did not enter into the blessing of belief in Jesus as the Messiah.

He missed it.

He missed the Messiah.

And thankfully, we have found the Messiah and call him Lord and Savior.

But so many so many miss him.

A question for us believers and followers of Jesus.

Is if God never gave us anything again, which again, this isn't that is not in God's character.

So this is a hypothetical fake question because the thing that this question is based on is something untrue.

But just work with me here.

If God never gave us anything again, if God were to restrain his blessing on us from this point forward, would you still praise him?

If God were to remove his hand from your life, would you still bend the knee to his Lordship?

Would you still follow his son?

Why ask this question?

What's the what's the importance of this question?

It's not to make you feel guilty, but it's to be honest with yourself.

Let me word the question in this way.

Has your devotion become dependent on what God can do for you?

Or is your devotion dependent on what God has done?

Because he has done enough.

He has done all that he needs to do.

But he blesses us with his never-ending faithfulness and devotion to us, even though we do not deserve it.

He provides for us.

He gives to us.

He indwells us because he said he would do it.

And he won't stop doing it.

And of course, this question is against the character of God.

His word is true.

He will never leave us.

He will never forsake us.

But we have to understand our part of that.

Again, it's not an equation because all from the very beginning of time, God's promise.

He made it dependent upon himself, not us, because if it were dependent on us, we would be screwed.

And we are screwed because all have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God.

Because our own works are like filthy rags.

What we produce is death.

What we earn is death.

But if we're honest with ourselves, if I'm honest with myself, sometimes my devotion can become dependent on what I bring to the equation, what I bring to God.

And week after week, and as we read the scriptures, we can see that he is faithful to do it regardless of me.

He is faithful to do it regardless of what we can bring.

And I don't want to be like this guy.

I don't want Jesus to heal me.

And that's where it stops.

Regardless of if he brings physical healing on this side of heaven or not.

He has already done enough.

He has already given me new life.

He has already given me that living water through his son, Jesus.

And that is enough.

But how good of a God do we serve that he doesn't stop there.

He does provide for us.

He does give to us.

He does go above and beyond.

He is incredible.

And so he will never leave us.

And he will never forsake us.

He is faithful, even when we are faithless.

And that is good.

Good.

Thank God.

Because how often am I faithless?

More than I would like to admit.

But that does not mean that I should stop worshipping him, that I should stop running to him, that I should not stop repenting of my sin, that I should not stop following him and pursuing him.

Because he loves me.

He loves all of us.

And I want to be like him.

And thankfully he has empowered us and given us his spirit that enables us to do those things.

And so I want my devotion to God not to be based on what he can do for me.

He has already done enough.

The rest is just the icing on top.

Thank God he is so good.

Thank God he is worthy of our praise and our worship.

And even if he stopped, he has done enough.

He has given us Jesus.

And through Jesus we become the righteousness of God.

Through Jesus we are no longer at war with God.

We have peace with God.

Because Jesus is the prince of our life.

And he has already done what we could not do.

And I thank God for Jesus.

I thank God for what he has done.

And as we are in this season of thanksgiving and all the blessings that he has provided for us, I want to thank God for what he has done.

As we are in this season of thanksgiving and all the blessings that he has provided for us, I am reminded as how good God is and how he does not withhold himself from us.

We lack faithfulness and God does not.

That is all I got.
