---
layout: sermon
title: "John 1:1-18"
date: "2024-09-08T18:35:52.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/91492831/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-8-9%2F264b2687-8949-8358-500a-f8307ddf7c42.m4a"
duration: "19:40"
scripture: "John 1:1-18"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>The Prologue</p>\n
guid: 41421793-4b08-4b31-8308-e3fa16a28a12
episode_id: 76d2173e
---

## Transcription

So we are in last week we did a brief overview of the book of John read through the first six or so chapters and for those who are there I challenge you to read the rest of John and this isn't a time of confession so you don't have to confess if you did or not it's okay we'll start our exposition through the text this morning but let's read all of first John the first chapter we can read that and then we will jump into the text so if anyone wants to read all of John chapter one for us that would be great he came as a witness to bear witness about the light that all might believe he was not the light the light that came to bear witness about the light the true light which gives light to everyone was coming into the world he was in the world and the world was made through him yet the world did not know him he came to his own and his own people did not receive him but all who did receive him who believed in his name he gave the right to become children of God were born not of blood nor flesh nor of the will of man but of God and the word became flesh and dwelt among us and we have seen his glory glory as of the only son of him the father full of grace and truth John bore witness about him and cried out this was he a clean I said he who comes after me ranks before me because he was before me for from his fullness we have all received grace upon grace for the law was given through Moses grace and truth came through Jesus Christ no one has ever seen God the only God who was at the father's side he has made him known and this is the testimony of John when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him who are you he confessed and he did not deny but confessed I am not the Christ and they asked him what then are you Elijah he said I am not are you the prophet he any answer no so they said to him who are you we need to give an answer to those who sent us what do you say about yourself he said I am the voice of one crying out in the wilderness make straight the way of the Lord as the prophet Isaiah said now they had been sent from the Pharisees they asked him then why are you baptizing if you are neither the Christ nor Elijah nor the prophet John answered them I baptize with water but among you stands one who you do not know you do not know even he who comes after me the strap of whose sandal I am not worthy not worthy to untie these things took place in Bethany across the Jordan where John was baptizing the next day he saw Jesus coming toward him and said behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world this is he of whom I said after me comes a man who ranks before me because he was before me I myself did not know him but for this purpose I came baptizing with water that he might be revealed to Israel and John wore a witness I saw the spirit descend from heaven like a dove and it remained on him I myself did not know him but he who sent me to baptize with water said to me he on whom you see the spirit descend and remain this is he who baptizes with the Holy Spirit and I have seen and have the next day again John was standing with two of his disciples and he looked at Jesus as he walked by and said behold the Lamb of God the two disciples heard him say this and they followed Jesus Jesus turned and saw them following him and said to them what are you seeking and they said to him Rabbi which means teacher where are you staying he said to them come and you will see so they came and saw where he was staying and they stayed with him for stayed with him that day for it was the day of the Sabbath which means the tenth hour one of the two who heard John speak and follow Jesus was Andrew Simon Peter's brother he first found his own brother Simon and said to him we have found Messiah Messiah which means Christ he brought him to Jesus and Jesus looked at him and said you are Simon the son of John you shall be called Seth which means Peter the next day Jesus decided to go to Galilee he found Philip and said to him follow me now Philip was from Bethsaida the city of Andrew and Peter Philip found Nathaniel and said to him we have found him of whom Moses and the law and also the prophets wrote Jesus of Nazareth the son of Joseph and said to him can anything good come out of Nazareth Philip said to him come and see Jesus saw Nathaniel coming to him and said of him behold an Israelite indeed in whom there is no deceit Nathaniel said to him how do you know me he answered him or Philip called you when you were under the fig tree I saw you Nathaniel answered him Rabbi you are the son of God you are the king of the Israel Jesus answered him because I said to you I saw you under the fig tree do you believe you will see greater things than these and he said to him truly truly I say to you you will see heaven open and the angels of God ascending and descending on the seventh day.

Awesome.

This morning we're going to focus in on the first 18 verses of chapter one which is often titled the prologue and And we You might have have the question or ask question.

Where's baby Jesus.

How come we're starting with like we're just jumping in right here and the And the answer to that question could very well be the key verse of or the entire purpose that John is writing this book and that's found in John chapter 20 where he says now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of his disciples which are not written in this book but these are written so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ the son of God and that by believing you may have life in his name.

John's purpose is not just to be a Teller of the life of Jesus.

His goal is to persuade his readers that Jesus is the Messiah that Jesus is the Christ that Jesus is as the words of Jesus would say later that Jesus is the way the truth and the life And that by reading this book you should be stirred to choose either Jesus as Lord and Messiah or as not.

John is like a lawyer on the defense and In the prologue we get his opening statement right which he starts by saying in the beginning was the word.

You've probably heard that before because if you were to flip to the first pages of the Bible says in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.

And of course, John is echoing and pulling from that Genesis creation narrative to intentionally.

He's trying to get his Well, it's kind of debated of who John was writing to was he writing to Greeks, or was he writing to Hebrews.

And some of this would go like well, he's probably writing to both.

And so that's why you get all these Old Testament sort of references and language of in the beginning.

And so John is connecting the story of of Jesus also to the history and the story of the Israelites.

And what is a key attribute of the God of Israel.

That he speaks.

He spoke and creation came into existence.

He called Abraham out to the wilderness.

He called and talked to Moses in a burning bush.

He spoke through the prophets and now his word has come to dwell with us.

In the beginning was the word and the word was with God and the word was God with God and was God are very small grammatical differences, but with major implications.

This is one of the passages that shows the distinct yet equal parts of our Triune Lord.

We believe in God the Father, Jesus the Son and the Holy Spirit all three are separate but equal.

And in one sentence, we see the word was with God.

So they are together.

And the word was God.

So they are separate yet equal.

Both are God.

And of course later, John even in the first chapter talks of the Holy Spirit.

But John continues.

He was in the beginning with God.

All things were made through him and without him was not anything made that was made.

Jesus is now identified as the incarnation of the member of the Trinity for whom by whom and in whom all things were made.

Jesus is God in human flesh.

It's almost like John is saying the one I'm going to tell you about the one in whom there is life.

The one in whom I want you to believe is the one who created you in the first place and nothing was made apart from him.

Verse four, in him was life and the life was the light of men.

Which we see two sort of key words here that we'll see throughout this whole entire book.

We will see the word life 47 times and we will see the word light 24 times.

Just like a lot that we saw in the book of Galatians, a lot of this contrast of life and death, light and darkness of God or of the world.

And then in verses six through eight, we get introduced to John the Baptist.

Right?

Verse six, there was a man sent from God whose name was John.

He came as a witness to bear witness about the light that all might believe through him.

He was not the light, but came to bear witness about the light.

John the Baptist was sent by God as Jesus's forerunner to point him out.

And we're told in verse 15 that John fulfilled his mission.

And he fulfilled his mission.

Verse 15, John bore witness about him and cried out, This was he of whom I said, he who comes before me and who he comes after me ranks before me because he was before me.

So John is saying that Jesus who came after him chronologically is higher than him, a higher rank than him, because he was before him.

So again, connecting him to God saying he was before him.

Then later in the chapter, he calls out Jesus saying in verse 29, the next day he saw Jesus coming toward him and saying, Behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.

Sweet, we have time.

I had an extra note here.

It's.

Verse 14, we'll jump to it real quick, because this is just kind of interesting and I thought it was cool.

Verse, chapter one, verse 14.

Jumping from John the Baptist.

We have seen his glory, glory as of the only son from the father.

We could very quickly and easily breeze past it and you might miss it.

But when John, the disciple whom Jesus loved, as he likes to speak of himself in this chapter in this book, John is speaking here in this moment of the transfiguration, where him, Peter and Peter James.

James, thank you.

They witnessed the divinity of Jesus, where they were taken up on a mountain and Jesus revealed his full glory.

Where for a moment, Jesus in all of his power takes office humanity reveals his divinity.

And so John is saying, we have seen his glory.

I have seen him in his, his, in his glory and heard the voice of God say.

This is my beloved son.

Listen to him.

So, verse 14, we have seen his glory, glory as of the only son from the father.

So when John says that, he is interpreting the words of God that Mark writes, Mark or Peter, whatever, that this is my beloved son.

Listen to him.

Those are the, that is the voice of God in context.

They heard the voice of God say, this is my beloved son.

Listen to him.

And so then John, when he goes to write down this letter is going, we have seen his glory, glory as, as of the only son from the father.

A fun note there that I thought was very interesting and back to the regularly regularly scheduled programming.

The prologue also speaks of the judgment of the world as well as God's own chosen people.

Verse 10, he was in the world and the world was made through him.

Yet the world did not know him.

He came to his own and his own people did not receive him.

Jesus will speak of this rejection in chapter three.

And he says, chapter three, verse 19, and this is the judgment.

The light has come into the world and the people love the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil.

And we cannot breeze over this warning for ourselves.

This verse tells us the world is exposed to the condemnation of God because people prefer the darkness to the light.

People did not want to come to the light, which is Jesus, because when we step into the light, our evil deeds are exposed.

And let's be honest, we don't like that.

We don't like seeing our humanity, our brokenness, our we don't like falling short.

We don't want to let people down.

And even worse, we let we let the God of of and creator of all things down.

And when we step into the light, we reveal that darkness and that sucks.

But there is good news.

Verse 12.

But to all who did receive him, who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God.

And this is the good news of the gospel, that those who believe in Jesus name, we get the right to become his chosen people.

We become God's children.

And John desperately wants his readers to readers to know the good news of Jesus.

And my prayer.

And if you haven't had the chance to finish the whole book of John, take the time this week, sit down, read through it.

Be exposed to the word, be exposed to the light of Jesus.

Because we will we as we dive into this book are going to be challenged with the truth of who Jesus is, with how he lived, how he calls us to live.

And that our lives would change through the power of the Holy Spirit by hearing and reading the eyewitness account of Jesus.

And that from that, the spirit would.

We would allow the spirit to take root in our lives, to reveal the darkness.

So that we can bring it to light.

Because first, John tells us that when we bring our sin into the light, that healing takes place.

And so maybe eyewitness accounts of Jesus.

That are written in this fourth gospel.

May these words, may Jesus's words transform us from the inside out.

Amen.
