---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 3:23-29"
date: "2024-06-09T16:54:38.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/87811620/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fproduction%2F2024-5-9%2F380181316-48000-1-c40de9c4f80af.m4a"
duration: "26:34"
scripture: "Galatians 3:23-29"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: Faith & our Identity Crisis

guid: 35a113d5-d707-470f-bdf0-b1dba44db775
episode_id: 3fd42124
---

## Transcription

Yeah, let's kick it off, read chapter three and then we will camp in verses 23 through 29, finish up the chapter.

But yeah, if somebody wants to read Galatians three and we'll all get started.

It's so deep.

Yeah.

Sorry.

I can read it.

Thank you.

Okay.

Oh foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you?

It was before your eyes that Jesus Christ is publicly portrayed as crucified.

Let me ask you only this.

Did you receive the spirit by works of the law or by hearing the faith?

Are you so foolish?

Have begun by the spirit, are you now being perfected by the flesh?

Did you suffer so many things in vain if indeed it was in vain?

As he who supplies the spirit to you and works miracles among you, do so by works of the law or by hearing your faith, just as Abraham believed.

Just as Abraham believed God and it was counted to him as righteousness.

Know then that it is those of faith who are the sons of Abraham.

In the scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preach the gospel before him to the Gentiles saying, in you shall all the nations be blessed.

So then those who are of faith and blessed are along with Abraham, the man of faith.

For all who rely on works of the law are under a curse, for it is written, first be everyone who does not abide by all things written in the book of the law and do them.

Now it is evident that no one shall be justified before God by the law, for the righteous shall live by faith.

But the law is not of faith, rather the one who does them shall live by them.

The scripture deemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us, for it is written, curses everyone who is hanged on a tree, so that in Jesus Christ the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles, so that we might receive the promised spirit through faith.

To give a human example, brothers, even with a man made covenant, no one annuls or adds to it once it has been ratified.

Now the promises were made to Abraham and to his offspring, it does not say, and to his offsprings, referring to many, but referring to one, and to your offspring who is correct.

This is what I mean, the law which came 430 years afterward does not annul a covenant previously ratified by God, so as to make the promise void.

For if the inheritance comes by the law, it no longer comes by promise, but God gave it to Abraham a five promise.

Why then the law?

It was added because of transgressions, until the offspring should come to whom the promise had been made, and it was put in place through angels by an intermediary.

Now an intermediary implies more than one, but God is one.

Is the law then contrary to the promises of God?

Certainly not.

For if the law had been given that could give life, then righteousness would indeed be by the law.

But the scripture imprisoned everything under sin, so that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.

Now before faith came, we were held captive under the law, imprisoned until the coming of faith would be revealed.

So then the law was our guardian until Christ came, in order that we might be justified by faith.

But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian, for in Christ Jesus, you are all sons of God through faith.

For as many of you were baptized into Christ and put on Christ, there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is no male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus.

And if you are Christ, then your Abraham's offspring bears according to a promise.

Awesome.

Okay, so we've spent a long deal of time in this chapter.

We can all work as a group.

But I want to see, can anyone summarize, doesn't need to be perfect, you're not getting graded here, again, that would be law.

Can anyone summarize the difference between the law and the gospel, or the covenant God made to Abraham versus the covenant God made to Moses, which is the law?

Can anyone just summarize or take a shot at it?

I know everyone's like, dang it, we're back in school, it's a pop quiz, I wasn't ready for this.

I have a note for the mosaic law.

It was never intended for salvation, it was used to show our sin and how we fall short.

Yeah, that's great.

The law requires doing, but the covenant just doesn't.

Yeah.

It's kind of the same thing that we just said, the law requires perfection, the gospel, like perfection was given to us.

Yeah.

Wasn't the mosaic law a way to be able to access the presence of God?

Or is it like the covenant with Abraham brought that presence to us?

Yeah, that's great.

Yeah, so Paul's essentially going, okay, I've spent this whole chapter, I spent the previous two chapters, which again, chapters and numbers and verses, those were put in after the fact so that we can have a good idea of like, oh, this is where we're reading and not like the 13th chapter or the 13th paragraph in this letter, this was again, a full letter.

And so right now we're in the middle of the letter and Paul spent the first part of the letter going like, let me tell you how you've been wrong, let me tell you that you are wrong, and now I'm going to prove it to you.

And I'm going to show you, I'm going to take you back to school and prove that not only is the covenant that God made with Abraham or the Abrahamic covenant superior, but it's also a foreshadow of what was to come in Jesus.

And so that Abrahamic covenant came first by a promise, right?

God promised to Abraham that you will be a blessing to the earth, you'll have as many descendants as there is stars in the sky, like all these things, and that there was one person, the offspring, who would be the promised one, which of course would be fulfilled in Jesus, and the Mosaic covenant came under laws and treaties.

But just like our laws, again, if you follow them, you're great, but if you don't follow them, then you are a criminal.

You're in trouble, right?

So the law came, right?

That's what he's saying here in verse 23.

Yes.

Now, before faith came, we were held captive under the law, imprisoned us until the coming faith would be revealed.

The law came and it imprisoned us.

Again, we talked a little bit about this last week, or as Paul would write in Romans 3, 23, we have all sinned and fallen short of the glory of God.

But then Romans 3, 24 continues, So as Tim had mentioned, the law shows us our sin.

The law shows us that we are imprisoned, we are against God, but Jesus came to free us from the law.

And for us now who are in Christ, the law also shows us what God desires, what God required of the Israelites, what God is like.

It shows us that he did not just give us the law to show us our sin, just to reveal the bad, but he also revealed to us how he is, right?

Because God is perfect, his law is perfect.

Jesus came, lived perfectly to fulfill that law.

So he showed us godly living and what he desires of us, what true righteousness looks like.

But we don't, that's, we're getting kind of ahead of ourselves and going down that rabbit trail.

So we'll put a period in that sentence right there.

And Paul continues in Galatians 3, 25, 26.

We are no longer under a guardian, for in Christ Jesus you are all sons of God through faith.

So now that Jesus has come, we are no longer under the guardian or the Greek word here.

I'm not going to pronounce it.

Kayla heard me listening to it last night and yeah, I'm just not going to give it a try.

But any words, the best translation of it to English would be like a tutor.

So like the law was our tutor, it was the teacher.

And in Paul's day, this word would have referred to a hired person or slave who was supposed to train the children of the family.

The tutor was supposed to train the children in basic knowledge, reading, writing, arithmetic, all those things, as well as morals.

The tutor was also supposed to punish the children if they misbehaved, as well as protect them from outside influence.

OK, so when Paul says they're under a guardian, they're under a tutor, this is what they're thinking of.

That person who was essentially like a really good nanny, right?

And so these ideas of teaching, punishing, setting apart, were Paul's using this word to inform them that this was also the role of the Mosaic covenant.

This was also the rules of the law to teach them the ways of God, right?

Thou shalt not steal, kill, murder, thou shalt not have no other gods before me.

These are teaching God's people God's ways.

So teaching them the ways of God, then punishing them when they did not follow God, and then also setting them apart.

Because again, when God gave Moses the covenant or the Ten Commandments, it was after 400 years of slavery.

So that's 400 years of foreign culture, that's 400 years of not knowing where you came from.

Sure you would be taught certain things.

I would honestly relate it to kind of like cultural Christianity, right?

We have these ideas, beliefs in our culture of how things should be.

I learned something new this week that I didn't realize in the state of Tennessee, if you go to four premarital sessions that you get a discount on your marriage license.

I did not know that.

That is cultural Christianity, right?

We want to train, we want you to have some premarital counseling, it could be from a pastor, it could be from a psychologist, whatever, and we'll give you a discount.

That is cultural Christianity at its finest.

So what that means is, when Paul's writing to these, well when Moses was handed the law, the Israelites had seen 400 years of culture and sure their parents might have taught them a thing or two, they might have heard a thing or two while growing up, but the outside forces were so, the outside culture was so strong.

And so now God has given them the law and going, not only am I going to teach you my ways, punish you when you don't follow them, but also I'm showing you this to set you apart.

God's going, you are my people.

I chose you, now I'm going to show you how we live.

And we're going to live differently than the world and the culture around us.

But now that Jesus has come, Paul says, we're no longer under the tutor, we are under Christ.

We're under Jesus.

Because, verse 26, in Christ Jesus you are all sons of God through faith.

Okay, and there's a very important distinction here that Paul is making and it's important we see it.

So he says, in Christ Jesus you are all sons of God through faith.

Now if you were to read that in some different translations, they might say children of God, they might use different words like that.

But Paul is making a very specific example by using just sons here.

Because back in these times, back in, back under the law, women would not get an inheritance from the family.

The inheritance would just go to the men.

So when Paul says we are all sons, Paul's going, we all inherit the inheritance.

We all get the inheritance.

It's not just for the men, it's for everyone.

So Paul's making the distinction that we are all sons.

We all are of equal heirs of the promise of God.

And that's a very important distinction.

Sweet.

We all inherit the same thing.

Verse 27, for as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.

Okay, baptism, and this is straight from our New City Catechism, baptism is the washing with water in the name of the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit.

It signifies and seals our adoption into Christ, our cleansing from sin, and our commitment to belong to the Lord and to his church.

So baptism, it signifies and seals our adoption into Christ.

That is a new identity.

When we are adopted into Christ, that is a new identity.

Our cleansing from sin, we have been washed clean, and after we wash up, what do you do?

You put on fresh clothes, right?

You don't put on your same dirty clothes, you got to put on new clothes.

Back to verse 27, you have to put on Christ, right?

For as many of you were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.

We have to put on this new clothes.

We have to put on, as Paul would write in Romans 12, a transformed mind, renewed from the, yeah, a transformed mind.

Then our commitment to belong to the Lord and to his church.

That's a new family.

So we have a new identity, we have a clean spirit, and we have a new family.

That's why in verse 28, there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is no male and female, for we are all one in Christ Jesus.

If you are in Christ, your whole identity changes, your whole world changes.

We go from dark to light, from death to life.

Why is this so important that Paul would bring this point home to the region of Galatia?

Because again, they're going back to a racial and a people group problem, right?

You've got Jews, you've got Gentiles, and these Galatian churches, they, after Paul had come in and given them the gospel, people, the other teachers were like, ah, he was wrong on this part.

If you are a Gentile, you need to be circumcised so that you can look like a Jew and be like a Jew.

Paul is going, no, it's not Jew or Gentile, it's not rich or poor, it's not any of these, it's not slave or free, there is no male or female.

Again going back, there is, we are all, we all have an equal part of the inheritance of Jesus.

And so Paul is going, this is a whole new identity, this is a whole new belief system.

And you guys keep going back to what you did before, you keep going back, you're trying to put on your old self, and instead I need you to understand and see that you need to put on Christ.

Okay, which I think it's relevant that we take a moment to address our current culture, address our current world, because although the Bible was not written to us, it was written for us, right?

So we can take these biblical truths and see that they are one truth, but also see that these truths are unchanging, truth is unchanging.

And in our culture right now, with it being June, it has been deemed Pride Month, right?

And let's just take a biblical worldview and let's see the world, not through our own lens or through our culture, but since we are believers, since we have put our faith in Jesus, as Paul just told us, we need to put on Jesus, that means we need to look through scriptural eyes and see one, first of all, pride comes before the fall.

That's what the scripture says, that's in Proverbs, that our pride comes before the fall.

So first off, to have to be prideful in anything is wrong.

Second, just as we read in our psalm, Psalm 34, it said, I will boast in God, my Savior, that's what David said, so he's boasting not in himself, but he's boasting in God, or for us to boast in Jesus, that is the only proper thing for us to boast in or to be prideful in is our God, our Savior, the one who is the author and finisher of our faith, that's what we boast in.

And it's also important for us to notice that if we are in Christ, those who are against Christ, or those who do not believe in God, it is 100% okay for them to believe in God, be proud of those things, because they're not under Christ.

And again, this is where our cultural Christianity can run a little rampant, because we go, this is bad, we shouldn't allow this for people in our country.

If they are not under Christ, one, we pray for them, two, we befriend them, or else how will they see Christ?

But for us to put our Jesus beliefs, our faith, our Jesus behaviors on them is unfair and Because as scripture says, they are blinded, sin blinds us, it covers us.

And so we need to make that distinction.

I'm talking specifically to believers, I'm talking specifically to those who are in Christ.

And so those who are in Christ, we pray for those who might be in the LGBTQ community or whatever, we pray for those who do not know Jesus, that they would come to faith in Jesus.

We accept them for where they're at, but we do not conform to them.

There's a difference between acceptance and approval.

And in our culture, again, our culture would say if you accept me, that means you approve of me, which it doesn't take any two cents to know, like there are, I don't approve of all of my own behaviors.

I fall short often, but I still have to accept myself, right?

Acceptance approval, two different things.

How about those who would say you can be a Christian and be LGBTQ?

I will say it simply, if you find your identity in anything other than Jesus, you're wrong.

And guess what?

That goes for us who might not be LGBTQ.

If I place my identity in my job, in my family, in my status, if I place my identity in anything other than Jesus, I am in the wrong.

And so before we go and look at the speck in our friend's eye, let's look at the plank in our own eye and see that we have an identity problem as well.

I have an identity problem as well.

If you find your identity in anything other than Jesus, then we are all wrong.

Paul tells us here that our identity is not in the things of this world.

Our identity is in Christ and in Christ alone.

And like I said, we don't want to over condemn one sin, it just happens to be pride month.

And this was what we were talking about.

And so I was like, it would be terribly wrong to not address that.

We have all placed our identity in ourselves or in things of this world, and we must look at ourselves in the mirror and see my own identity problem.

And Paul is writing to these people going, you have placed your identity or your characteristics of what a believer looks like in the wrong things.

You've made it Jew and Gentile.

And Paul's going, no, it is Jesus and Jesus alone.

Then verse 29 continues.

And if you are Christ's, then you are Abraham's offspring, heirs according to the promise.

So if you have faith in Jesus, you inherit Abraham's promised offspring, which was Jesus.

You are a beneficiary of God's promise to Abraham, and he was faithful to fulfill it.

And Jesus will be faithful to his promise that he will return again.

This is a beautiful passage and I think a beautiful chapter where we just got really like a master's education on the difference between the Abrahamic covenant and the Mosaic covenant and how the Abrahamic covenant is superior to the Mosaic covenant and how Jesus fulfilled not just the Mosaic covenant in him living a perfect life, but also how he was the promised offspring of Abraham.

And now Paul is writing to these people who would have believed in Jesus going, do not place your faith in the things that you do.

Place your faith in Jesus, the one who did it all for you.

See that Jesus came for all, not just for man, but for all.

And see that all of us are equal and are equal heirs of the promise if our faith is in Jesus.

So this is a, I'm glad we were able to spend so much time on this chapter and dive into these really sort of deep intricacies and see how God had written this story from before time and now he's given it to us to believe in his son.

And that not only would it change the way we act, but it would change a whole lot more before that.

It would change our minds, it would change our hearts, it would reveal to us how much we need Jesus and how much we have been given through Jesus.

And it's a powerful and beautiful thing.
