---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 6:11-18"
date: "2024-08-25T13:20:16.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/90896783/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-7-26%2F8cc7329d-1d99-0568-5fcd-ab2da15b4dac.m4a"
duration: "23:18"
scripture: "Galatians 6:11-18"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>The end! & Paul’s final remarks. </p>

guid: aa2237de-4c76-48c3-9923-439e8de5a782
episode_id: ee4fee10
---

## Transcription

This morning we are going to focus in on Galatians 6, 11 through 18.

And why don't we read just the entirety of chapter 6 and then we will break it down.

So if somebody wants to read chapter 6 and then we will finally close the letter.

So let us not grow weary of doing good for in due season we will reap if we do not give up.

So then as we have opportunity let us do good to everyone and especially to those who are of the household we pay.

See with what large letters I am writing to you with my own hand.

It is those who want to make a good showing in the flesh who would force you to be circumcised and only in order that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.

For even those who are circumcised do not themselves keep the law, but they desire to have you circumcised that they may boast in your flesh.

But far be it for me to boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ by which the world has been crucified to me and I to the world.

For neither circumcision counts for anything nor uncircumcision but a new creation.

For as for all who walk by this rule, peace and mercy be upon them and upon the Israel of God.

From now on let no one cause me trouble for I bear on my body the marks of Jesus.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit brothers.

Amen.

Awesome.

So as we finish Paul right away makes a point of how he is writing with his own big handwriting and he kind of leaves these two final points.

And so we're going to see the two points and also kind of differentiate because they're kind of intertwined.

But two main points here that he makes and let's jump into this first one.

Is it sorry.

Verse 12.

It is those who want to make a good showing in the flesh who would force you to be circumcised and only in order that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.

For even those who are circumcised do not themselves keep the law.

But they desire to have you circumcised that they may boast in your flesh.

So the the Judaizers were desiring for these Gentile converts to be circumcised not for the person's good but for the good of the religious leaders.

Why?

Because they didn't want to be persecuted because and so at the time of course the Christians were being persecuted because it was seen as an offshoot of Judaism.

It was against Judaism which would have been of course the dominating religion in this area and region.

And so the justice Paul if we go we can go back to his conversion.

Paul was persecuting Christians right.

He was he was and he was a religious elite.

He was a Pharisee and he was persecuting Christians.

And so now Paul's on the other side and he's like the reason they don't want you or the reason they want you circumcised is because they don't want persecution.

They don't want you they don't want us to be seen as as accepted.

They just as they just as they did with Jesus they want to do with you.

And so the Jews thought Jesus was a false Messiah.

And so this new religion was being started from false teaching.

And so their goal was to encourage the Gentiles to be circumcised not only because they believed it was still necessary but because they thought this would also spare them from persecution which is the first part of the first point that Paul's making.

But it wasn't just persecution.

It was also their their motives from slash for persecution.

And so when we look at Paul's day and age we have seen that not only do those people try to to duck the persecution but they also love gloating in new convert circumcision.

And so this is like the first point that Paul is making that the Judaizers were proud of these Gentiles getting circumcised.

And they were boasting in those numbers and the numbers of people getting circumcised.

And so they were escaping persecution all the while bragging about the people being circumcised.

And so now when Paul later in verse 17 he says I bear on my body the marks of Jesus.

So we got to recognize the contrast here.

The false teachers wanted to have the Gentiles circumcised and as a result they were also marked by boasting.

And this was a boasting in their own accomplishments rather than Paul who goes I bear on my body.

So he's boasting on the marks of Jesus the marks of persecution.

And Paul is referencing his marks of Jesus.

He's referring to the persecution he faced and that's written about in 2 Corinthians.

Second Corinthians 11 five times he went through the 40 lashes minus one.

Thirty nine if you needed help with that math.

And these were the marks that he bore as a result of being united to Christ.

These were shared sufferings with Christ as he calls it in 2 Corinthians.

And these were the marks that Paul wanted to be associated by and known for not the mark of circumcision.

He did not want to be marked by the ceremonial law.

Again this is what the circumcision is representing.

He wanted to be marked by Jesus.

And of course Paul is referring to his persecution as him being marked by Jesus.

Now does that mean we need to go and be persecuted for us to be adjoined with Christ?

No.

Although if it were to come and happen we should like Paul and like Jesus take on the persecution.

But persecution is not a necessity for our salvation.

Thank you Jesus.

And so that's why Paul writes verse 15 for neither circumcision counts for anything nor uncircumcision but a new creation.

What matters is a new creation not some ceremonial or outward act.

And Paul like he has been doing this whole letter repeatedly go back to the old goes is going back to the Old Testament.

And this is another one the new creation language is another callback to Isaiah 65 verse 17 where it says for behold I create new heavens and a new earth and the former things shall not be remembered or come into mind.

So Paul is essentially saying when he says for neither circumcision counts for anything nor uncircumcision but a new creation.

What Paul is essentially saying is you false teachers and your followers are marked by the old creation.

I Paul only want to be marked by Christ.

My marks are the marks of my new creation.

That's what Paul is essentially saying.

And again he's comparing this circumcision and uncircumcision this as he's compared a lot in the last two chapters the flesh and the spirit.

He's again comparing these two things of your old self before Christ which would have cared about circumcision or uncircumcision in the context that he's talking to for us now.

Whatever.

But in the context he's saying your old self your old flesh your old creation is or I guess your original creation cares about the flesh but the new creation not so much.

You boast in the law.

Is what Paul saying I boast in the one who fulfilled the law who overcame sin death in the grave.

I boast in the resurrected Jesus who has ascended to the right hand of God.

That's what Paul is saying.

And if I were to be honest if when I look at this not only do I would I like to say I more often align myself with with Paul and I would like to view myself as Paul who's writing this letter to the Evangelical Church of America.

No I would I would like in my pride.

That's where I would put myself.

But if I were to be honest I would probably more align with the religious elite who think of themselves more highly than they should and who boast in their works.

And I must not we must not brag about what we are or who we are.

We must just as Paul did boast in Jesus and boast in the work of Jesus.

So I should boast and I will claim not to my actions but I have the opportunity to boast in the actions of Christ.

My actions are like filthy rags but the cross of Jesus is worth bragging about.

That's Paul's first point.

Persecution along with their moral braggadociousness.

Thanks.

Second point.

And as we already referred to all right we already read because we read the whole passage in verse 16 Paul calls those who are a new creation the Israel of God.

Now to emphasize this point we're going to go back to Isaiah if you want to read it yourself.

I'm reading Isaiah 54 verses 8 through 10 and I'll give you some context while you're flipping or pressing buttons to get there on your phone.

So at the time Israel was in exile for their sin and in his judgment God forced Israel out of the promised land.

But of course this was not the end of the story.

God promised through the prophet that the exile would end and he would return his people to the promised land which is where we find ourselves in Isaiah 54 verses 8 through 10 where it says in overflowing anger for a moment.

I hid my face from you.

But with everlasting love I will have compassion on you says the Lord your Redeemer.

This is like the days of Noah to me and I swore that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth.

So I have sworn that I will not be angry with you and will not rebuke you for the mountains made apart and the hills be removed.

But my steadfast love shall not depart from you and my covenant of peace shall not be removed says the Lord who has compassion on you.

So Isaiah is using this new creation language right.

He's the the the prophet says that Israel's return from exile is like the receding floodwaters from the story of Noah which was a recreation or a renewing of the creation.

And so the God is telling the prophet Isaiah this and he is telling it to the people of Israel.

And so Paul just said that both circumcision and uncircumcision don't matter.

But what does matter is the new creation.

The new creation counts for something.

And what did the prophet Israel Isaiah say God would do that in this new creation his love would not depart from them that peace will not be removed but that the Lord will have compassion on them.

He in this the when we look at this Isaiah passage just as the God said he would not flood the whole earth again there is still this this renewal or this this new thing that's coming.

And so as we return to Galatians and look at verses 15 and 16 for neither circumcision counts for anything nor uncircumcision but a new creation.

And as for all who walk by this rule peace and mercy be upon them and upon the Israel of God.

So if anyone is in Christ they are a new creation.

And now Paul says if anyone Jew or Gentile circumcised or not is in Christ if anyone is in Christ he or she belongs to Israel.

The one who looks to Christ by faith is the Israel of God.

Paul applies this title Israel of God which any ordinary Jew would have thought exclusively applied to circumcise Jews.

But now it applies to uncircumcised Gentiles and the false teachers were trying so hard to be identified as Israel because they thought that the law and obeying the law is what made them unique.

But Paul surprised them with the truth that regardless of their efforts only those who belong to Christ are properly called Israel.

Paul had earlier made this point when he wrote in Galatians 3 7.

Know then that it is those of faith who are the sons of Abraham.

Right.

We talked about this months and weeks ago of how if you are in Christ you are a son of Abraham.

And of course that word son is not to exclude females but it is saying that all both men and women are the heirs because of course the inheritance only passed down through the man.

And so if Paul is saying that we are all sons of Abraham we are all of the inheritance of Abraham which of course in its fulfillment is Jesus.

And so if we are in Christ if we have accepted Christ then we are heirs of Abraham.

We are sons of Abraham.

We are the Israel of God.

God.

And this I'm not going to spend too much time on this because it's truthfully not worth talking about because it's a very new idea.

And there's this belief in Christianity that.

That.

Jews.

Today by religion not by race.

That Jews are still God's chosen people.

And.

The question then for that belief that I have is.

If Jesus was a son of God if Jesus fulfilled all of these Old Testament things if Jesus said I am the way the truth and life no one comes to the father but through me.

And then you by religion being a Jew reject Jesus how could you be the Israel of God when you have rejected his son.

And it is there are some Christians today who believe this who teach this and.

To me it just it just doesn't.

It just doesn't make sense.

Because.

Jesus.

He's.

He's the thing right he's the guy and if you're not attached to the guy then you're not attached to the guy and so anyways back back to us.

We are the Israel of God if you are in Jesus you are part of God's family God's chosen people Jesus came to earth lived a perfect life died a sinner's death not so that we could just survive through life.

No he has given us a hope and a future and a new identity.

Since Christ is the true Israel of God then those who look to Christ by faith are united to him because.

The Israel of God we now share in all the blessings promised to Israel because of Christ indeed we are a new creation through Christ if these things are true then what does it say about the one in whom we should boast.

Should we boast in ourselves and all the work we've done to earn our salvation to earn our adoption into Jesus and his family no because we haven't done anything we have simply just received we do we do not have our our works to save us we have our works to condemn us.

But when we boast not in ourselves but in our Savior we can look to Jesus and say look at what he's done look at what look at how he has saved me look at how he has has made me new.

So through Jesus we have been freed from the bondage of the curse of the law.

God sends his spirit into our hearts so that we manifest his fruit to the blessings or sorry so that we manifest his fruit to the blessing of our neighbor and the glory of God.

God has given us his spirit so that we can be a blessing among all people be a blessing to our neighbor be a blessing to our co workers be a blessing to those we meet out and about.

So in this way we all whether it be Jew or Greek or slave or free or male or female are sons of God sons of Abraham and the Israel of God.

And so we've got these two points we've got that Paul ends this letter with the outward action that kind of sprung upon this whole thing right of circumcision and them wandering from the truth wandering from the gospel of Jesus.

Then we have part of this which is aimed at the the leaders of the whole of this whole movement that was happening of the Churches of Galatia and Paul goes your circumcision doesn't save you and for those of you who boast in in circumcision you can't even uphold the law.

So why are you boasting at all and then he says and forget all that none of this counts for anything unless you are a new creation in Christ then if that's you you are the Israel of God.

So Paul is saying the fulfillment and the promises of our ancestors and their ancestors and all the way back to Abraham all of those promises were fulfilled in Jesus and came through Jesus and if you are in Jesus then you are part of the family all the way back to Abraham.

This is the message that got impressed on the hearts of the Galatians through Paul's preaching and teaching and is the message that we needed for our church in this season and we should treasure in our hearts the beauty of the word of God that is a light to our lamp to our feet and a light to our path and of freedom.

Of liberty these messages of hope these messages of Christ and Christ alone and that's all I got.
