---
layout: sermon
title: "John 4:1-15 "
date: "2024-11-03T14:21:22.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/93952627/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-10-4%2F389231490-44100-2-0835c12337525.m4a"
duration: "33:40"
scripture: "John 4:1-15"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>Woman at the Well (Part 1)</p>

guid: 7efe0ff4-809a-43e6-9647-e81f4e3d59e2
episode_id: 1f617026
---

## Transcription

Jesus, weary as he was from his journey, was sitting beside the well.

It was about the sixth hour.

A woman from Samaria came to draw water.

Jesus said to her, give me a drink, for his disciples had gone away and decided to buy food.

The Samaritan woman said to him, how is it that you, a Jew, asked for a drink from me, a woman of Samaria, for the Jews have no dealings with Samaritans?

Jesus answered her, if you knew the gift of God and who it is that is saying to you, give me a drink, you would have asked him and he would have given you living water.

The woman said to him, sir, you have nothing to draw water with and the well is deep.

Where do you get that living water?

Are you greater than our father Jacob?

He gave us this well and drank from it himself, as did his sons and his livestock.

Jesus said to her, everyone who drinks of this water will be thirsty again, but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never be thirsty again.

The water I will give him will become in him a spring of water welling up to an eternal life.

The woman said to him, sir, give me this water so that I will not be thirsty or have to come here to draw water.

Jesus said to her, go call your husband and come here.

The woman answered him, I have no husband.

Jesus said to her, you are right in saying I have no husband, for you have had five husbands, and the one you now have is not your husband.

What you have said is true.

The woman said to him, sir, I perceive that you are a prophet.

Our fathers worshiped on this mountain, but you say that in Jerusalem is the place where people are to worship.

Jesus said to her, woman, believe me, the hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem you will worship that you do not know.

We worship what we know for salvation is from the Jews.

The hour is coming and is now here when the true worshiper will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father is seeking such people to worship him.

God is spirit and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.

The woman said to him, I know that Messiah is coming, he who is called Christ.

When he comes he will tell us all things.

Jesus said to her, I who speak to you am he.

Just then his disciples came back.

They marveled that he was talking to the woman, but no one said what do you seek or why are you talking with her.

So the woman left her water jar and went away to town and said to the people, come see a man who told me all that I ever did.

Can this be the Christ?

They went out of the town and were coming to him.

Meanwhile the disciples were urging him saying, Rabbi, eat.

But he said to them, I have food to eat that you do not know about.

So the disciples said to one another, has anyone brought him something to eat?

Jesus said to them, my food is to do the will of him who sent me and to accomplish his work.

Do you not say there are yet four months?

Do you not say there are yet four months?

Then comes the harvest.

Look, I tell you, lift up your eyes and see that the fields are white for harvest.

Already the one who reaps his receiving wages and gathering fruit for eternal life.

So the sower and reaper may rejoice together.

For here the saying holds true.

One sows another reaps.

I sent you to reap that for which you did not labor.

Others have labored and you have entered into their labor.

Many Samaritans from that town believed in him because of the woman's testimony.

He told me all that I ever did.

So when the Samaritans came to him, they asked him to stay with them and he stayed there for two days.

And many more believed because of his work.

They said to the woman, it is no longer because of what you said that we believe, for we have heard for ourselves and we know that this is indeed the Savior of the world.

After the two days he departed for Galilee where Jesus himself had testified that our prophet has no honor at his own home town.

So when he came to Galilee, the Galileans welcomed him having seen all that he had done in Jerusalem and the peace where they too had gone to the peace.

So he came again to Canaan in Galilee where he had made the water wine and at Capernaum there was an official whose son was ill.

When this man heard that Jesus had come from Judea to Galilee, he went to him and asked him to come down and he broke his son for he was at the point of death.

So Jesus said to him, unless you see signs and wonders you will not believe.

The official said to him, sir come down before my child dies.

Jesus said to him, go your son will live.

The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him and went on his way.

As he was going down his servants met him and told him that his son was recovered.

So he asked them the hour when he began to get better and they said to him, yesterday in the seventh hour the fever left him.

The father knew that that was the hour when Jesus had said to him your son will live.

He himself believed and all of his household.

This was now the second sign that Jesus did when he had come to the city of Galilee.

Awesome.

Okay, so we're going to spend the next two weeks hearing the story.

The woman at the well whole ordeal.

One because it's 42 verses and that's a lot, but also because there's a ton to dive into here and first I just want us to get acquainted with the rivalry amongst Jews and Samaritans and it goes back quite some time.

Are you on, are you doing slides this morning or is it Frank?

It's you?

Okay, I'm gonna airdrop you a map.

I meant to do this earlier but here we are in real time.

Just so that we see it.

I'll tell you when to pull it up but I'm gonna airdrop it to you real quick.

So but this rivalry between Jews and Samaritans goes all the way back to King David and when David became king so he conquered Jerusalem and made it the political and religious capital for the nation of Israel.

Then David has a son Solomon and Solomon builds the temple but when Solomon's kingdom was divided into the northern kingdom which was Israel and the southern kingdom which was Judah those who were in the northern kingdom constructed Samaria as their capital city and when the northern kingdom was defeated by Assyria in 722 BC a lot of Jews were deported and then pagan Assyrians were brought in and so now you have this mixtures of the Jews and the Gentiles or the Assyrians and they create this people which is now known as the Samaritans and this mixture of people also produced a mixture of religious practices so the Samaritans accepted only the first five books of the Old Testament the Pentateuch and so they ignored the writings of the prophets the Psalms but specifically they rejected anything that spoke of Jerusalem which makes sense because they're like why would we don't know like Jerusalem Alabama am i right their central place of worship was Mount Gerizim and not the temple of not the temple in Jerusalem because they can't stand Jerusalem which in Jesus times would have been rebuilt by Herod okay so from so we can just very clearly see from this that it's clear why Jews didn't like the Samaritans and Samaritans didn't like the Jews to make a Harry Potter reference the Samaritans were like mudbloods right they were mixed and if you are on Lord Voldemort's team if you are a death eater then you would hate these mudbloods you would hate these people who are mixed they're not pure bloods and we don't need to go down that whole rabbit trail but they were so detestable that Jews would go completely out of their way which this is a perfect time to pull up the map so we can see okay so Jerusalem's down here right and Samaria is right here and so if you were going to festival in Jerusalem and you lived up here towards the Sea of Galilee which again that's where Jesus is going to end up right he's going to end up over here that's what we read at the end of the chapter that he gets up here but the path for people to go from whether it be up here at the Sea of Galilee down to Jerusalem obviously the easiest path would be to just go straight through right but if you go straight through now I feel like Nick Saban you're going to pass through Samaria which is right here and again these two they did not mix they were oil and water they they did not like each other they couldn't stand each other there was no emulsion between them and so what they would do is they would go either this this they would take this track up here this way to get around Samaria or they would go pass through the Jordan River so they would jump the river then go up here and then jump the river again to get up here to this region region of Nazareth Sea Galilee and same thing if these people were going up here to down here they would go they would work so hard to not get to to not go through Samaria but it says in verse four it says and he Jesus had to pass through Samaria you can go back to the yeah perfect thanks he had to pass through Samaria Samaria Jesus had to pass through Samaria why I think if we just look at the text and get context clues the answer is is I think is a possible answer for us is in verse 41 where it says and many more believe because of his Jesus's word and they said to the woman it is no longer because of what you have said that we believe for we have heard ourselves and we know that this indeed is the savior of the world and again we learned in John chapter 3 that God so loved the world and here is an example of the world of course we get this the testimony of a five-time divorcee who is currently not with her husband but God came to the Samaritans too for God so loved the world that would mean some Samaria that would mean the Samaritans these mixed breed gentile ish Jews Jewish gentiles whatever you want to call them God came for them too and we for us we go like yeah of course God came for them but again you have to think if you're a first second century Jew and you are reading this story for the first time and you're like okay cool he has this conversation with Nicodemus and then you're reading through and then you turn the pages to chapter 4 and then this guy who is the word who has became flesh and who John the Baptist declared is the the lamb of God who will take away the sins of the world and then you see this conversation with a Pharisee a religious elite a teacher of the of the Jews and then you get to chapter 4 of course they didn't have chapters and verses but for our sake they get to chapter 4 and you read of this Jesus guy who has to go through Samaria he has to go through why like why would he go through Samaria and then you read the story and then you're like oh and the Samaritans believed in him too what is up with this Jesus guy um just absolutely wild right so Jesus verse 5 he came to a town of Samaria called Sikkar near the field that Jacob had given to his son Joseph and Jacob's well was there and so Jesus wearied as he was from his journey was sitting there uh was sitting beside the well it was about the sixth hour which is about noon so um Jesus arrives to this town in Samaria and Jacob's well was there and it was noon so the ancient Jews they started their day at 6 a.m so with it being the six hour you can do the math and Jesus was just tired and thirsty from his travels and so he grabs a seat and is and verse 7 says a woman from Samaria came to draw water and Jesus said to her give me a drink for his disciples had gone away into the city to buy food the Samaritans the Samaritan woman said to him how is it that you a Jew asked for a drink from me a woman of Samaria for the Jews had no dealings with the Samaritans okay so uh the disciples go off into Samaria and they're looking for a Big Mac and Jesus is now uh talking to first off a woman um um how dare he talk to a woman obviously that's a joke um but not just a woman a Samaritan woman and we just sort of understood a little bit but we even get uh a little more context here where in quotations at least for us John puts for Jews had no dealings with Samaritans and uh it was even so there was such a difference such a rivalry such a uh bumping of heads with these two people groups that uh even the fact that the disciples are going into town to eat is a big deal because if they share a plate with a Samaritan then they are considered unclean so like when they had no dealings with Samaritans they had no dealings with Samaritans you could not share a plate with a Samaritan or else you would be unclean um and so uh Jesus his disciples are in town becoming unclean and uh Jesus has this conversation with a Samaritan woman and this Samaritan woman is going like why are you a Jew talking with me and uh but a question that I have for this girl this lady uh is why are you out getting water when the sun is at its highest right like it would have been customary to go get uh water in the cool of the of the morning since you had to carry this big jar big jug of water you got to carry it back into town and uh uh it's gonna be hot it's gonna be nasty uh did she have a late night was she late getting back from a vols game was she did she sleep in uh missed her alarm uh but anyways this woman's question to Jesus is how is it that you a Jew ask for a drink from me a woman of Samaria uh and Jesus answered her if you knew the gift of God and who it is that is saying to you give me a drink you would have asked him and he would have given you living water the woman said to him sir you have nothing to draw water with and the well is deep where do you get that living water are you greater than our father Jacob he gave us this well and drink from it himself as did his sons and his livestocks so Jesus claims if you knew the gift of God that could mean uh just literally him being the savior of the world uh it could mean the gift of eternal life which is staring at this woman here in the flesh um alternatively uh the Old Testament scriptures the Torah were known as the supreme gift of God so what Jesus could be saying to her is if you knew your Torah if you knew for her if you knew the first five books of the Old Testament if you knew the Pentateuch if you even knew that you would understand who's standing in front of you right now you would have an understanding of who I am and you would be asking me for a drink you would be asking me for living water and uh this and then her response to that is in the natural right she's like bro you don't even have a bucket to get water what do you what are you doing here bro and this conversation should remind us of just chapter three of Jesus with Nicodemus and when uh Jesus is telling Nicodemus that you must be reborn and Nicodemus replies to Jesus and goes you're expecting me to get back into my mother's womb what's what's wrong and so Jesus is having this conversation and uh if we remember all the way back when we started talking about uh the book of John there's sort of this like um this uh mystery this sort of uh lack of clarity that sometimes we see there's there's questions to be answered there there's people not understanding and uh then we see Jesus give us understanding and give these people understanding and so uh uh here the woman responds sir you have nothing to draw water with and the well is deep where do you get that living water are you greater than our father Jacob uh our he gave us this this well and drink from it himself and uh I'm pretty sure in fact uh you can still go get water from this well right now crazy enough it's still up and running um which is pretty cool I guess it's down since it's underground but anyways that's neither here nor there okay so we get this back and forth and this repeated line of of water and living water and of course there is actual water it just it told us in the text Jesus was thirsty he actually wanted to drink of water and uh but Jesus talks about this living water and then and uh we're we'll explain that a little bit more but as we continue to read we gain a little bit more understanding to what Jesus is trying to say verse 13 Jesus said to her everyone who drinks of this water will be thirsty again but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never be thirsty again the water that I give him will become in him a spring of water welling up to eternal life the woman said to him sir give me this water so that I will not be thirsty or have to come here to draw water okay so living water um Jesus equates this living water to eternal life as well as the spirit of God indwelling us as the true thirsting that we long for I'm gonna say it again because there's a lot there and it's worth repeating so Jesus uh defines living water as eternal life and the spirit of God indwelling us as the true thirsting that we long for and this was not a new concept or idea of course everything goes back to the Old Testament because Jesus fulfilled the Old Testament so what Jesus said what Jesus did would be in light of what not came before him because he was before them but okay we don't need to go down that rabbit trail the Lord declared through the prophet Jeremiah Jeremiah 2 13 for my people have committed two evils they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters and hoe and hewed out cisterns for themselves broken cisterns that can hold no water so the God is revealing to the prophet Jeremiah and he says that the people of God they have turned from God who is the fountain of living water and his chosen people turn to their own wells and guess what our wells are broken because we're broken but there will come a day where living water flows from Jerusalem which is what Zechariah 14 8 says on that day living waters shall flow out from Jerusalem half of them to the eastern sea and half of them to the western sea it shall continue in summer as in winter and the Lord will be the and the Lord will be the King over all the earth on that day the Lord will be one and his name one okay and so we have to we have to remember and understand especially when we see Old Testament and the talk of temple we have to remember even Jesus's words from a few chapters prior where Jesus says my temple will be destroyed and or the temple will be destroyed and three days later be raised again when Jesus speaks of of the temple of course he's talking about the actual temple which would be destroyed but also he's talking about the temple of himself and three days later would rise again and we have to understand that the temple is a type of of messiah right it is a it is a picture of what the messiah is and be and so when we read in Zechariah on that day living water shall flow out from Jerusalem living water should flow out from Jesus and of course this is also kind of referencing the spirit in us right uh okay I think that's I could go on for that but let's get back to the point here the point being that Jesus is this living water and this living water equates to eternal life it also equates to the spirit indwelling us um and in context to the story where we are in John chapter 4 remember samaritans did not believe or did not agree to all of the Old Testament so those passages that I just read to you she might have not had any idea or or or understanding of those references of living water that the prophets would later give um because samaritans only believed in the first five books of the of the bible so it's very plain to see um that uh she kept this conversation in the natural because she might not have understood that do we have in the first five books of the bible do we have some sort of writings or some sort of um ideas of water and uh eternal life and the these things that uh Jesus is quoting and referencing yes uh we could look to Moses striking the rock water coming from the rock the rock the provision for their for their travels those things like that um we could look to that even um we get the in Genesis we get this picture of Eden and there being rivers of in Eden and so we can look to that as well so there would have been precedent for her to understand this but that's uh beyond the point uh she says in verse 15 sir give me this water so that I will not be thirsty or have to come here to draw water and this is such an honest reply from her she was interested in the living water she was down with the living water but she really did not want to go back to that well she says sir give me this water so that I will not be thirsty or have to come back here to draw water emphasis added this is like such a confession and of course we've read the rest of the story so we know why she's ready for indoor plumbing we know why she's ready to not go to the well because she's had five husbands and the man that she's with now is not her husband and so every time going to that well she would be putting herself in guilt and shame it's no wonder why she goes to the well at noon because if she were to go to the well when every other woman was there when every other one was there to draw water uh she would have uh had to face the shame she would have had to face the name calling she would have had to face the the whispers behind her back she would have had to face the uh the woman who probably said to her you wrecked my home she would have had to face that day after day and so to not have to face that to not have to go back to this well seems pretty freaking awesome and so what does Jesus do he calls her on it right and let's remember in John 3 19 this is the judgment the light has come into the world and people love the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil for everyone who does wicked things hates the light and does not come into the light lest his work should be exposed Jesus here has no problem exposing her darkness Jesus has no problem exposing her sin and Jesus said to her go call your husband and come here the woman answered him I have no husband Jesus said to her you are right in saying I have no husband for you have had five husbands and the one you now have is not your husband what you have said is true there are many scenes that I want I myself want to watch back when I get to heaven there are many scenes and this is this one is on the top of the list because uh I mean it's just like so there's so much tension here there's so much like I would love to see expressions I would love to see you know uh those things but uh regardless to quote her later in the chapter he told me all that I ever did and I mean this is like a deer in the headlights moment if I ever saw one or could think of one um and how does she respond she changes the subject see she's like I don't like where this conversation is heading how about uh sir I perceive you're a prophet I could tell you you know some stuff um but our father's worshiped on this mountain but you say that in Jerusalem is the place where people are to worship and that's a great way to change the subject and she clearly did not want to talk about her private life and so she changes the subject to a theological question about the proper place for worship um and I mean it's true the Jews had their temple in Jerusalem Mount Zion that was their holy place and the Samaritans who rejected everything except the Pentateuch in the Old Testament uh they had their central sanctuary at Mount Gerizim and she might have really wanted to know the answer to that question but it seems like where she asked it this is a question of of diversion she's like how about we uh squirrel um she she's clearly she doesn't want to talk about this and um we're going to continue our our study through this passage here next week and explain more of this next week um but the point that I want to close with and it's more so a question and it comes from Jesus's words in verse 13 Jesus says everyone who drinks of this water of course he's talking about the water at that well will be thirsty again but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never be thirsty again the water that I will give him will become in him a spring of water welling up to eternal life the question I want to ask in closing is do you find yourself being sustained on h2o on water or on living water Jesus gives us this living water to eternal life and the spirit of God indwelling us as the true thirsting that we long for what you and I long for is not to be sustained by self but by our savior what you and I long for is not to be sustained by a spouse but by our savior and a lot of the times I think if we're honest with ourselves we try to sustain our own life our own happiness we try to we try to be sustained in our own strength and on our own selves and we are settling for well water when we could have living water and most of us here in this place we have the belief and understanding in Jesus and that he is that living water he has given us eternal life he has given his spirit inside of us to indwell us and we know that that is what we long for to be sustained by him to be fueled by him to to be secure in him to be assured in him and through him and if we are continuously and trying to achieve and find our our acceptance and assurance in what we can achieve on this earth then we are going to continue to be thirsty if we're going to uh continue to try to achieve based on relationship and status and how we're doing in that way we were we will be like the man who has built his house on sand and just continuously tossed back and forth and up and down and and life will continuously rock us and wreck us but if we continue to come back to Jesus we will be sustained and so let us come back to our savior we must ask for forgiveness for turning to other things than him and we must as Jesus says later in the chapter he is seeking those who worship him in spirit and in truth which first just even referencing that let us be mindful that Jesus is seeking us Jesus is coming after us right God has come to us Emmanuel God is with us and so what we must worship both in spirit and in truth knowing that he is what we truly long for he is what we truly desire and so do you find yourself being sustained on well water being sustained on well water or on living water that's all I got
