---
layout: sermon
title: John 2:12-25
date: 2024-10-06T22:05:22.000Z
category: sermon
audio_url: https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/92714762/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-9-7%2F06a06bd7-d785-adf5-aa81-5d70b18285e8.m4a
duration: 22:14
scripture: John 2:12-25
series: John
pastor: Josh Reeder-Esparza
description: "Jesus turns tables"
guid: a12a3548-2721-4dda-a496-e71964573240
episode_id: 2674b2fb
---


## Transcription

So we are back in John.

We just started chapter 2 last week and we are continuing in chapter 2.

The verses we will be looking at are chapter 2 verses 12 through 25.

But just so that we have a full refresher, if somebody wants to read chapter 2 and just end up verse 25, that is what we will be going through today.

I can read that.

My hour has not yet come.

The master of the feast called to the bridegroom and said, Everyone serves the good wine first, and when people have drunk freely, then the poor wine.

But you have kept the good wine until now.

This is the first of his signs Jesus did at Cana in Galilee and manifested his glory.

And his disciples believed in him.

After this, he went down to Capernaum with his mother and brothers and disciples, and they stayed there for a few days.

The Passover of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

In the temple he found those who were selling oxen and sheep and pigeons and the money changers sitting there.

And making a whip of cords, he drove them all out of the temple with the sheep and oxen.

And he poured out the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.

And he told those who sold the pigeons, Take these things away.

Do not make my father's house a house of trade.

His disciples remembered that it was written, Zeal for your house will consume me.

So the Jews said to him, What sign do you show us for doing these things?

Jesus answered them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.

The Jews then said, It has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and you will raise it up in three days.

But he was speaking about the temple of his body.

When therefore he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they believed the scripture and the word that Jesus had spoken.

Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover feast, many believed in his name when he saw these signs that he was doing.

But Jesus on his part did not entrust himself to them because he knew all people and needed no one to bear witness about man, for he himself knew what was in man.

Thank you.

Alright, let's practice really quickly.

Heavenly Father, we thank you for your spirit that inspired this work.

We pray that your spirit open our hearts to the text and guides accordingly.

If you love your Father, use his name.

Bye Sam!

So this chunk of scripture, you can kind of see four parts in it.

You first see this move to Capernaum, you see him clearing the temple, Jesus clearing the temple, this reference of him replacing the temple, and then there's kind of like tag on here about an adequate faith that kind of ties into something that John says in the verse before.

With chapter 2, Nate last week brought up, there's kind of two themes that we start getting into as we get out of this introduction that John gives us.

We see this theme of newness.

This is the beginning of Jesus' ministry.

You can see in this area, you see Jesus bringing in the newness of old forms of worship.

He's introducing a new covenant, you're starting to see him introducing a new kingdom.

And then there's another theme of chronology, and Nate kind of went into detail about the days that we saw in the week last chunk, where you can kind of see the first week in detail.

John's making a really concerted effort to show the chronology.

He does that again here in certain ways, and also adds some dates and things like that.

So you can see that he's using the days to highlight the unfolding of Christ's identity.

So those are kind of some themes that are going on here.

And I'll just kind of start through.

So after this, he went down to Capernaum with his mother and his brothers and his disciples, and they stayed there for a few days.

It doesn't say move here, but we see in Matthew 4.13 that they went and lived in Capernaum.

It's kind of hard to say that Jesus lived somewhere because he was such an itinerant teacher that he just moved around.

We see his ministry really start there.

He meets a lot of his disciples there as well as we see a lot of miracles happening there.

And it mentions here again for a few days.

So they leave the wedding at Cana.

This is his move from his hometown into Capernaum.

And then the few days would suggest that this Passover happens just after.

So they then leave Capernaum, go down to Jerusalem.

And that probably would have been like a hundred mile journey.

So for seven days journey through the desert.

They've got Roman roads and things like that.

But it was also probably packed with Jews from all over because you have all these people coming, descending upon or ascending upon to Jerusalem for the high feast of Passover.

And there was something mentioned here last week about there's some chronology going on here that some people bring up in biblical criticism.

Matthew, Mark and Luke, we see Jesus cleansing the temple at the end of his ministry.

It's just before he goes to the cross at that Passover.

John's putting it here.

People get weird when there's duplicates in the Bible and they start saying that it shows errors in the scripture.

But once you start taking it apart, some people will say like, well, the gospel authors were less concerned with chronology, more concerned with being topical.

It kind of move things around.

Doesn't seem to be the nature of the case here.

Though that is true that the gospel authors do that, John is being really clear about the dates.

So most scholars through church history have said probably just a natural reading of this is that it happened twice, which you can imagine Jesus fully God, fully man is coming to Passover at the temple, which is a huge concession of God to his people for him to have them come worship him for the forgiveness of the sins and also just the meeting place for them that has now become a marketplace.

You can imagine the son of God would probably want to cleanse the temple.

So you kind of get this impression.

It's almost strange that we only have two accounts of him doing it.

So that that's kind of the chronology there.

Background on the Passover.

We've talked about that recently.

But what's important to see here is the Passover.

The sacrifice for the Passover was an unblemished lamb, male unblemished lamb of one year old.

And that was you would put on the doorpost during this was the Exodus.

And the angel of death that would come across and plague Egypt would pass over your house.

And let's see.

So what we see here, I'll just jump into that the Passover, the Jews was at hand and Jesus went up to Jerusalem and the temple.

He found those who were selling oxen and sheep and pigeons and the money changers sitting there and making a whip of cords.

He drove them all out of the temple with sheep and oxen.

They poured out the coins and the money changers and overturned their tables.

And he told those who sold the pigeons, take these things away.

Do not make my father's house a house of trade.

The key here is in verse 14 that it says in the temple he found those as one pack this.

It doesn't seem the problem, though there could be issues of greed within this temple system for this extra biblical system.

It doesn't seem that's the problem.

The problem is that it's in the temple where it shouldn't be in the first place.

So we see a couple of things here.

We see animals and money changers.

Why were there animals and money changers?

Animals as we saw Passover, there was a sacrifice due, but there was also oxen and doves.

Those are part of the Passover sacrifice.

You've got all these Jews that are descending upon Jerusalem.

No pun intended.

They're going to knock out two birds with one stone.

There's other sacrifices that are laid out in Leviticus that they would probably be performing.

So we see Jesus having a four or seven day journey.

You can imagine that the people could have come from farther, which also speaks to why the animals would be there because the Lord was very specific about the state of the animal that you would sacrifice.

It had to be unblemished, had to be a certain age very frequently.

So instead of trying to bring an unblemished one year old lamb across the desert in ancient times, it would be a lot easier for you to go to the temple by an animal later.

So it becomes a big market pretty quickly and it is run by the Sanhedrin, who is the ruling judicial body of Jerusalem at this time.

And in 8066, we see Josephus, a Jewish historian, mention that that Passover, there was 255,000 lambs slaughtered in Israel.

So you can imagine the scale of this marketplace was enormous.

That's just the lambs, let alone oxen, doves.

You also have the money changers here.

The point of them being there also kind of ties into Sanhedrin that the temple authorities were very detailed about the purity of the coin just as it was used.

So there was this coin, I can't even say it, I didn't write it because I couldn't say it, but it's a Tyrian dirac, doesn't matter.

It's called a Tyrian stater, it's like the word for it.

But it's about the size of a quarter, made out of silver.

They would come and the Jews at this time had to pay a temple tax.

So if you're 20 years and up, 20 years and up male, you have to pay a temple tax of a half shekel was what the Old Testament called for.

At this time it was that currency.

More detail than is needed, but people were bringing all these different currencies from all over in Israel, as well as you've got Roman currency that's stated, you have local currencies.

None of them were good enough for the temple authorities.

So you would then also have to use the temple coinage to buy the animals.

So you can see this system, the temple coinage sometimes had a tax of 12% a fee on top of it.

So to buy the animals you're having to put in the coinage.

You can see what the Sanhedrin is doing.

Because any temple transaction, yeah, very good profit.

Why does any of it matter?

The temple was supposed to be a place of humble sacrifice, of sovereign worship.

It is a place for you to come and meet the Lord, and it's been turned into a marketplace.

Which is the words that Jesus says there, take these things away, do not make my Father's house a house of trade.

And you don't see the spirit of Moses here.

Which Moses in Deuteronomy 4, Moses is told he's not going to get to go back into the promised land.

He's messed up.

And yet when he's giving the law again to the Israelites, we see in Deuteronomy 4, 7, for what great nation is there that has a God so near to it as the Lord our God is to us whenever we call upon him?

This attitude, and he's already pushed out of the promised land, but he's seeing the concession of the temple in the first place that this sacrificial system's even set up.

It's supposed to be a meeting place of solemn prayer.

So the issue that Jesus has here wasn't just the greed and corruption, which we can see there and probably sometimes read into it too much.

It's the fact that the commercialization is evidence of this lack of solemn prayer within the temple.

And then there's not a ton of detail here, but it is interesting that the take these things away, which is the second to last book of the Old Testament, when you can kind of hear the drum beat speeding up that the Messiah's coming.

So you can start seeing Jesus identifying himself.

You start to see that John is putting that identification together, that it's pointing to this Messiah.

And then we actually see him say that.

He says, Remember that it was written, Which is Psalm 69, 9.

I'll read from Psalm 1 to that.

So this is David writing in present tense, or his present tense.

My eyes grow dim with waiting for my God.

More in number than the hairs of my head are those who hate me without cause.

Mightier those who would destroy me, those who attack me with lies.

What I did not steal must I now restore.

O God, you know my folly.

The wrongs I have done are not hidden from you.

Let not those who hope in you be put to shame through me.

O Lord God of hosts, let not those who seek you be brought to dishonor through me.

O God of Israel, for it is for your sake that I have borne reproach.

That dishonor has covered my face.

I have become a stranger to my brothers, an alien to my mother's sons.

And here it is.

So, for zeal for your house has consumed me.

And the reproaches of those who reproach you have fallen on me.

What's interesting that's happening here in John is, you just heard there, verse 9, For zeal for your house has consumed me.

John then writes, zeal for your house will consume me.

So John is on the fly interpreting this as a messianic song that is pointing to prophecy being fulfilled in David's greater self, making this connection through David who is a king, a messiah, messiah at the time, pointing to the messiah to come, which it's not usually interpreted as a messianic song, but he's doing it directly there.

We see it maybe four or five other times in the New Testament that Psalm 69 is quoted.

So you can see his disciples starting to understand what's going on.

Verse 18.

So the Jews said to him, What sign do you show us for doing these things?

Jesus answered them, destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up.

The Jews then said, it has taken 46 years to build this temple and will you raise it up in three days?

But he was speaking about the temple of his body.

So the animals and the money changers we were just talking about, you've got just to start with the money changers, you've got tables and tables of people probably with earthenware vessels full of coins, full of the silver we talked about, but also all the coins that other people are bringing in.

There's no paper currency at this time that people are using.

So he's turning over these onto the ground.

It's a stone floor.

You can imagine pots breaking, coins all over the floor.

He's making a whip to drive the oxen out.

The whip probably wasn't used on the people.

I've always read it that way and the more I read they're like the whip was probably for the oxen.

The phrase I saw a couple of people say is oxen are not easily moved, which does give emphasis to the mess that Jesus is making in the temple.

So at this point, surely he has the entire temple court's attention.

He's probably in the court of the Gentiles, which is you've got the temple and on the outside, you kind of got this what you would see like a temple court, like a city center almost, but it's on the outside.

We see in the other gospels that's where this happens.

But the Sanhedrin is pretty eager to maintain decorum at this time.

They've got all these concessions from Rome, say like you guys can worship without worshiping Caesar, keep things under control.

And at the same time, Herod just rebuilt the temple.

You've got a Roman garrison that is looking down into this court.

So you can imagine the entire temple is looking at them.

The Sanhedrin is trying to maintain things.

If Jesus is just some dissenter, they're going to grab him by the scrap of the neck and throw him out the back door.

But the Sanhedrin come to him and say, or the Jews said to him, what signs do you show us for doing these things?

So you're starting to see that they're kind of getting the sense of they might be in the presence of one of God's prophets.

This might not just be some goofball.

There is kind of this tone here that maybe maybe he's not all that wrong about the problems that we see in the temple.

That there's no Jew that could have looked at the Old Testament and not seen how this was not how the temple was supposed to look.

So he asked for a sign.

And his response is destroy this temple and in three days I'll raise it up.

Which we have history and the rest of the New Testament tell us what he meant.

But at the time nobody knew what he meant.

So much so that John had to editorialize and jump in in verse 21.

He's like, but he was speaking about the temple of his body.

And then he says, when therefore he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that they had said this and he believed.

And they believed the scripture and the word that Jesus had spoken.

There was this interesting point I saw in commentary from D.

A.

Carson.

It was just this treatment of this section that we know Jesus is talking about his resurrection year.

The temple being torn down, the new temple being rebuilt.

But he is also cleverly giving them the sign they're asking for.

They're like, show us the sign.

He was like, fine, tear the temple down.

I'll rebuild it.

And he said, anyone who could restore the temple within three days of its complete destruction must be judged to have the authority to regulate its practices.

So they don't call his bluff.

But you can see that Jesus is also kind of being clever here.

I'll give you a great sign.

And there's also something to be said.

Him cleansing the temple.

Somebody with the understanding of the Old Testament would probably be able to see that as a sign as well, which we do see here.

They ask, give us a sign versus just throwing him out.

And this is when John is starting to make this connection to what we see the author of the Hebrews kind of pull apart and put back together for us to understand that the temple itself is a type and shadow of what is to come in Jesus and what did come in Jesus.

So it is this pointing through this whole sacrificial system, this concession to show how gracious God is pointing to Christ.

That the only temple that could truly manifest the Father had to come and had to die for our sins.

We need a Savior who lived a perfect life to stand in our place for our sin and by his works.

And what's interesting here is they it's kind of broken up where it goes from verse 22 and a lot of our Bibles probably have like a chapter break there or a paracope break.

It says, Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover feast, many believed in his name when he saw the signs that he was doing.

But Jesus on his part did not entrust himself to them because he knew all people and he did no one to bear witness about man for he himself knew what was in man.

So you see this shallow, easily shaken faith based on miracles.

When just before John mentioned when therefore he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this and they believe the scripture showing what is in Christian apologetics.

First and foremost, what we have is we have a historical book about the account of Jesus raising from the dead.

If if someone can raise himself from the dead, he has authority to verify the things that he says and that his apostles said about him after.

Which then is the basis for us to come to know him and for him then as we see here to entrust himself to us.

We see him push forward in John 1014 where he said, I am the good shepherd.

I know my own.

They know me.

So we see kind of a cautionary tale of throughout the New Testament when people ask for signs, they're usually asking for signs after they just saw a sign as we just saw them do.

They just had a sign.

He just cleansed the temple and they say, give us a sign.

So it's kind of this warning against this fickle searching faith.

So in summary, this whole area, we see Jesus revealing his authority.

John is really interested in bringing up his identity as well as trying to speak of the new movement of the temple system.

This is like on the fly in the person showing that he's going to then replace the temple system.

And we start when it comes to our faith, we start with the historical truth that then leads to him renewing our hearts and the work that he does in us.

Yeah, as Nate says, that's all I got.
