---
layout: sermon
title: Galatians 6:1-10
date: 2024-08-18T20:00:46.000Z
category: sermon
audio_url: https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/90632337/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-7-19%2Fdeb697a7-6b44-9664-b2f8-bccc4f923ea6.m4a
duration: 27:12
scripture: Galatians 6:1-10
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: "Pauls instructions to the Galatian Church"
guid: 7f2660ec-ae84-4a85-9f00-fca8ee00702f
episode_id: 51ce11e9
---


## Transcription

For freedom Christ has set us free.

Stand firm therefore and do not submit again to a yoke of slavery.

Look, I, Paul, say to you that if you accept circumcision, Christ will be of no advantage to you.

I testify again to every man who accepts circumcision that he is obligated to keep the whole law.

You are severed from Christ.

You who will be justified by the law, you have fallen away from grace.

For through the spirit of by faith we ourselves eagerly await for the hope of righteousness.

For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision counts for anything, but only working through love.

If you were running well, who hindered you from obeying the truth?

This persuasion is not from him who calls you.

A little leaven leavens the whole lump.

I have confidence in the Lord that you will take no other view and the one who is troubling you will bear the penalty, whoever he is.

But if I, brothers, still preach circumcision, why am I still being persecuted?

In that case the offense of the cross has been removed.

I wish those who unsettle you would emasculate themselves.

For you were called to freedom, brothers.

Only do not use your freedom as an opportunity for the flesh, but through love serve one another.

For the whole law is fulfilled in one word.

You shall love your neighbor as yourself.

But if you bite and devour one another, watch out that you are not consumed by one another.

But I say, walk in the spirit and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh.

For the desires of the flesh are against the spirit and the desires of the spirit are against the flesh.

For these are opposed to each other to keep you from doing the things that you want to do.

But if you are led by the spirit, you are not under the law.

Now the works of the flesh are evident.

Sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, envy, drunkenness, orgies, and the things like these.

I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.

But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control.

Against such things there is no law.

And those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.

If we live by the spirit, let us also keep in step with the spirit.

Let us not become conceited, provoking one another, envying one another.

Brothers, if anyone is caught in any transgression, you who are spiritual should restore him in a spirit of gentleness.

Keep watch on yourself lest you too become tempted.

Bear one another's burdens and so fulfill the law of Christ.

For if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.

But let each one test his own work, and then his reason to boast will be in himself alone and not in his neighbor.

For each will have to bear his own load.

Let the one who is taught the word share all good things with the one who teaches.

Do not be deceived.

God is not mocked.

For whatever one sows, that will he also reap.

For the one who sows to his own flesh will reap, will from the flesh reap corruption.

But the one who sows to the spirit will from the spirit reap eternal life.

And let us not grow weary of doing good, for in due season we will reap if we do not give up.

So then, as we have opportunity, let us do good to everyone, and especially to those who are of the household of faith.

See with what large letters I am writing to you with my own hand.

It is those who want to make a good showing in the flesh who would force you to be circumcised, and only in order that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.

For even those who are circumcised do not themselves keep the law, but they desire to have you circumcised that they may boast in your flesh.

But far be it from me to boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.

For neither circumcision counts for anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation.

And as for all who walk by this rule, peace and mercy be upon them and upon the Israel of God.

From now on, let no one cause me trouble, for I bear on my body the marks of Jesus.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers.

Amen.

Awesome.

We are quickly coming to a close on the book of Galatians, which seems like it's been, I mean it's been a while.

And next, if you're wondering, we will go and we're going to jump into the book of John, which will be fun.

Expect yearly to go through one of the Gospels.

That's like a non-negotiable for us as a church that we will go through a Gospel a year.

Yeah, I was going to try to make a joke about like, doctor a day keeps the apple away, Gospel a day or Gospel a year keeps the devil in fear.

That's stupid.

So back to Galatians.

Paul is wrapping things up and starting really to put a bow on this letter.

And but yet he has some final instructions for the Christians in Galatia.

And so let's before we dive into this last chapter, we can kind of take a step back and I can quickly sort of give us a catch us up to Chapter six.

Right.

So Paul is up in arms about the Galatian churches drift from the Gospel of Jesus back to the law and back to Judaism.

And he's challenging their beliefs and questions as it pertains to the Mosaic law and how the Judaizers love the law of Moses.

But Paul establishes throughout Chapter one, Chapter two, three, I mean throughout the whole thing that the covenant God made with Abraham obviously not only came before Moses, but it's also a greater covenant.

And Paul makes his argument how the Israelites required a mediator or a guardian.

And that was the law.

And then Jesus came, fulfilled the law.

And so to return to the Mosaic law for means of salvation is to reject Jesus.

Then Paul goes, so what do we do now?

And we just read Chapter five for freedom.

Christ has set us free to do what?

To love one another.

And then so because of that, do not gratify the desires of the flesh, but walk by the Spirit and in you, the Spirit will produce his fruit.

And so that very briefly catches up.

And so now Paul goes, verse one, brothers, if anyone is caught in any transgression, you who are spiritual should restore him in a spirit of gentleness.

Keep watch on yourselves, lest you too be tempted.

So Paul is just finishes this whole thing about the fruit of the Spirit and walking in the Spirit, keeping in step with the Spirit.

And then he kind of shifts gears and goes, what do you do if someone in your church is is found to be in like surprise sin, like you catch someone in sin?

And I'm not sure why Paul would word it that way.

Maybe he knew more of the context of the church.

And so because of his writings, he's saying like, what do we do when we find someone in sin?

What do we do as the church?

Right.

And the believers should restore them with a spirit of gentleness.

Now, it should be said that the person being caught in sin is repentant.

That's important because how do you restore a person who does not want to be restored themselves?

But nonetheless, it is our job to treat them with gentleness.

Paul uses the word you who are spiritual.

Well, I guess it's translated you who are spiritual.

And that isn't like ultra like charismatic spiritual.

He's not saying like you who are like extra spiritual.

He's saying those who are filled with the spirit.

So all believers, you who are spiritual, who have this spirit inside of them.

Right.

Remember when Paul is using these like spirit words, he's come.

It's in comparison to the flesh.

So there's like two camps.

And so Paul uses those who are spirit filled should restore in a spirit of gentleness.

And this seems really hard to do because when we hear or see or maybe have experienced a scandal in the church, it seems like the response is to cast them away as quickly as possible.

Let's just get rid of this.

Let's get rid of this problem.

Let's get rid of this issue.

But Paul writes in verse one, keep watch on yourself.

Let's you to be tempted.

Paul goes like, check yourself before you wreck yourself.

Right.

And it's almost like he's saying, remember how Jesus embraced you with the spirit of gentleness?

Shouldn't you do the same?

Or as Paul puts it in Romans, doesn't God's kindness lead us to repentance?

So not only are we to receive these people with gentleness, but then he goes on to say, verse two and three, So bearing one another's burdens and so fulfill the law of Christ, for if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.

So bearing one another's burdens fulfills the law of Christ, which law?

Of course, love your neighbor as yourself.

It's really interesting, though, the way he puts the, like, how do we treat someone with sin?

Bearing one another's burdens.

It's almost like this, like, bearing one another's burdens seems, you know, when, when stuff really hits the fan, That's when, like, of course, carrying one another's burdens is important, but it's also important to bear one another's burdens in the small things and in the little things, Like bearing one another's burdens could look like bringing someone a meal when they have a baby or you tear your Achilles or you, or I guess those are some big things.

Especially mine.

Yeah.

But it could, I mean, it can be, it could be anything.

And, but it's really interesting when you put it up against someone who's caught in sin.

We don't want to usually, I'll speak for myself.

Usually when someone sins against me or I feel like someone has sinned against me or has done wrong against me.

The last thing I want to do is think about bearing their burdens.

And Paul puts these two things right next to each other.

And obviously it's by no coincidence.

And so this is like truly a gut check to my pride because we should treat each other with the same loving kindness in which God treats us.

And yet when I look at myself, I don't do a very good job of that.

But then when I look at the church in America, I see a bunch of hatred and disdain and whether it be against denominations or against pastors who come out and sin.

And, you know, that leads down a whole different tangent.

But when I read this, I am convicted of deceiving myself and of thinking more highly than of myself than I ought to because I'm treating one man's sin greater than my own.

And not recognizing my sin.

And as it was put in, as Paul put it in chapter five, devouring one another and cutting one another and being consumed by one another.

And then Paul continues in verse four and five, let each one test his own work and then his reason to boast will be himself alone and not in his neighbor.

Verse five, for each will have to bear his own load.

Paul is forcing us to look in the mirror.

And when I look in the mirror, I see my flaws.

I see my mistakes.

But we also must not live in the mirror.

But we must recognize the plank in our own eyes, Jesus would say, and humbly receive others and help one another's along the way.

It was once said, the church is a hospital for sinners, not a museum for saints.

And oftentimes, I think I have heard this in when I've heard people quote this line.

It's in context to somebody showing up on a Sunday and accepting people for as they are.

Right.

But it should be us in our everyday life because we are the church.

And so our homes should be hospital for sinners.

When we're out and about, we should be a hospital for sinners.

The other day, we had somebody in looking at our oven.

And typically when you have people coming into your house who work on whether it be like a washer or dryer or some sort of appliance like that, you're thinking it's going to be like some rough and tough guy.

Well, I open the door and I see purple hair.

And then it's very clearly a man who's pretending to be a woman.

And it like caught me off guard, completely caught me off guard.

And I was just like, what?

And then he's like, I'm here to see a stove.

And I'm like, yeah, man, come on in.

And I was a little shaken, especially going back on how much I let that rattle me and how much I let that get into my head.

Instead of giving this person the loving kindness that God has given me.

And that's not to say I was, I mean, I offered to make the man a coffee.

So I was kind.

Yeah.

But but still I was I was like taken back by like, man, I really let the exterior.

Effect the way I treated a person, even in my own home.

And so we'll see if he comes back to actually fix or if they're going to send somebody else.

Anyways, the church is a hospital for sinners, not a museum for saints.

Instead of comparing ourselves to our sinful neighbor, we must compare ourselves to Christ.

We are we are called Christians, which is little Christ's is how that word breaks down.

So we are to compare ourselves to Jesus, not our sinful neighbor.

Yet, how often do I compare myself to my neighbor versus comparing myself to Christ?

Jesus is our aim, not our neighbor who is just as flawed as we are, which is why Paul writes for each will have to bear his own load, because when we stand before God one day, we do so alone.

I do not get to look at the love and kindness and sweetness of my wife and go, well, look at how great my wife is.

No, I need to embody these things myself.

I cannot look to others or compare to others for their actions or for their sin.

I must look to myself and I must stand myself before God and give an account for what I have done.

I cannot play the victim for actions or or blame it on others or on circumstances.

No, I will be judged for my actions and for what I have done.

And so when Paul says for each will have to bear his own load, it's going you have.

You will give an account for yourself.

And that's scary.

Also good.

But we need these reminders of our sinfulness.

We also need the reminders of God's grace and Jesus and our need for the Holy Spirit, because how quickly can we wander and turn to our own strength thinking we have arrived or made it on our own.

But let us be people who are who humble themselves and are more reliant on the Holy Spirit than ourselves.

Paul has some other things to share here with the Church of Galatia and he changes the topic and verse six or in chapter six, verse six, he says, Let the one who has taught the word share all good things with the one who teaches.

I guess you could call this my Jerry Maguire moment going show me the money.

Just a stupid joke.

Maybe this was Paul's solution to the Galatians bad teaching was like pay your pastors.

But in all seriousness, Paul must have felt the need to clarify verse five where he says for each will have to bear his own load.

Then verse six, let the one who has taught the word share all good things with the one who teaches.

I mean, just truthfully, it can be a little awkward or feel awkward personally talking about money as a pastor, because all of you are the reason that my family has food on its table.

But when we teach the word passages about money come up and my job is to preach the word.

My job is not to feel awkward about bringing up money or things like that.

If it's here, we're going to talk about it.

And this is one of the reasons or this is one of the passages where Paul clearly states one of the reasons the church should be generous is to compensate.

The pastor for seven and eight do not be deceived.

God is not mocked for whatever one sows that will he also reap for the one who sows to his own flesh will from the flesh reap, reap corruption, but the one who sows to the spirit will from the spirit reap eternal life.

Jesus also said it this way for where your treasure is there, your heart will be also.

And Paul has been pulling on these two locations for a while now, the flesh versus the spirit and the same as so with our money.

Money is a tool and it can be used for either fleshly things or for spiritual things.

Is it fleshly to pay your bills or provide for your family or heck, even go on trips and relax?

No, but when money becomes your idol, you must look in the mirror when the trips and the things become the thing.

Then we must look in the mirror and go, OK, am I using my money for the flesh or for the spirit?

Am I reaping a fleshly harvest or is this a spiritual harvest?

And of course, what you reap or you reap what you sow is not just limited to money.

If you sow works of the flesh, which again works for the flesh, sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, envy, drunkenness, orgies and things like these.

You will reap from the flesh.

But if you sow from spirit, love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control against such thing, there is no law.

And then Paul goes, you will reap eternal life.

Paul is not yet done with his encouragement in Council, verse nine and ten.

He says, and let and let us not grow weary of doing good for in due season we will reap.

If we do not give up.

So then, as we have opportunity, let us do good to everyone and especially to those who are of the household of faith.

Following Jesus is not an instant gratification game.

We're sowing in the flesh is.

And how often do we like Peter, who was walking on water, take our eyes off of Jesus and start to sink to then cry out to him to save us again.

Do not give up.

Do not grow weary of doing good.

For in due season we will reap if we do not give up.

We must do good to all.

Let us do good to everyone.

But especially to our community.

We ought to be the most loving, caring, kind individuals towards our families, to our church family, and of course to everyone.

And something that I've noticed in my own life is if I can do those things in my home, if I can be loving, kind, gracious, generous, if I can be those things in my home, chances are it's going to spill out into the rest of my life.

But if I'm not doing it in my home and then I maybe try to do it in other places of my life, then not only does that cause tension within my home, but it usually ends up being from a wrong motivation, not from a right motivation.

And so something that I am thinking about pretty often is, hey, am I doing these things at home?

Am I being the most loving, obviously, towards my wife and my children?

Is it spilling out into my friends?

And if I'm not doing it in home, then I'm not doing it in my home.

And so I'm not doing it in my home.

And so I'm not doing it in my home.

And so I'm not doing it in my home.

And so I'm not doing it in my home.

And so I'm not doing it in my home.

Is it spilling out into my friends?

And if I'm not doing it in home, chances are I won't be doing it in the real world.

That's all I got.
