---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 3:15-22"
date: "2024-06-02T18:13:05.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/87523411/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fproduction%2F2024-5-2%2F379520184-48000-1-a4106e2e08b03.m4a"
duration: "25:40"
scripture: "Galatians 3:15-22"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: Abrahamic Covenant > Mosaic Covenant. Law vs Gospel\n
guid: 03eeef4e-1925-4df0-98bc-e025210c3c3a
episode_id: 4d3cefdc
---

Abrahamic Covenant > Mosaic Covenant. Law vs Gospel

## Transcription

We'll be in Galatians chapter three.

I thought we were gonna finish the whole chapter this week, the rest of the chapter this week, but one more week in Galatians three.

And today we'll be looking at verses 15 through 22, but why doesn't somebody read Galatians three, one, all the way through 22?

And just to give us some context and remind us of where we've been and what's next.

Galatians three, starting in verse one, and we'll read all the way through 22.

Sure, I'll do it.

Oh foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you?

It was before your eyes that Jesus Christ was publicly portrayed as crucified.

Let me ask you only this, did you receive the spirit by works of the law or appearing with faith?

Are you so foolish?

Having begun by the spirit, are you now being perfected by the flesh?

Did you suffer so many things in vain, if indeed it was in vain?

Does he who supplies the spirit to you and works miracles among you do so by works of the law or by hearing with faith?

What do they pretend?

Believe God and it was counted to him as righteous?

Know then that it is those of faith who are the sons of Abraham.

In the scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preach the gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying, and you shall all the nations be blessed.

So then those who are of faith, blessed along with Abraham, is it Abraham right now or Abraham?

Abraham's fine.

Okay, the man of faith, for all who rely on the works of the law are under a curse, for it is written, curse be everyone who does not abide by all things written in the book of the law and do come.

Now it is evident that no one is justified before God by the law for the righteousness shall live by faith.

But the law is not of faith, rather the one who does them shall live by them.

Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us, for it is written, cursed is everyone who is hanged on a tree so that in Jesus Christ, the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles so that we might receive the promised spirit through faith.

To give a human example, brothers, even with a man-made covenant, no one annuls it or adds it once it has been ratified.

Now the promises were made to Abraham in his offspring.

It does not say into offsprings, referring to many, but referring to one, into your offspring who is Christ.

This is what I mean.

The law which came 430 years afterward does not annul a covenant previously ratified by God.

So as to make the promise void, for if the inheritance comes by the law, it no longer comes by promise, but God gave it to Abraham by a promise.

Why then the law?

It was added because of transgressions until the offsprings should come to whom the promise had been made, and it was put in place through angels by an intermediary.

Now an enemy, now an intermediary implies more than one, but God is one.

Is the law then contrary to the promise of God?

Certainly not, for if a law had been given that could give life, then righteousness would indeed be by the law.

But the scripture imprisoned everything under sin so that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.

Awesome.

Yeah, so, jumping back up to verse 15, and again, Paul is kind of, he's leveling with the Galatians, who again believe that it was not just faith in Jesus that saved them, but it was also faith in Jesus plus their works, plus abiding and living to the law that saved them.

And Paul's going like, no, like you guys got it wrong.

Like it's not that works don't matter, but it does not attribute to your salvation.

It does not attribute to your justification.

Your justification is by faith.

And so now Paul is putting the Abrahamic law, which we talked about last week, which is all, I guess the last two weeks, and is all about faith.

And it was the faith of Abraham that he believed that the promise was to come, that he believed that the promise was through his offspring.

And then versus the Mosaic law, which was the 10 commandments plus the other 613 laws all throughout Exodus, Leviticus.

And so that's like the comparison is what saves you.

And so then Paul goes, to give a human examples, brothers, even with a manmade covenant, no one annuls it or adds to it once it has been ratified.

Now the promises were made to Abraham and to his offspring.

It does not say and to offsprings, referring to many, but referring to one and to your offspring, who is Christ.

This is what I mean.

This is what I mean.

The law which came 430 years afterward does not annul a covenant previously ratified by God so as to make the promise void.

So Paul's point is simple and yet very profound.

He's going, God gave the law through the Mosaic covenant 430 years after he had made the covenant promise to Abraham.

If by giving the law, God made the promises contingent on the obedience of his people to it, then the covenant promise to Abraham is null and void.

So if the covenant, again, if by giving the law, the Mosaic covenant, God made the promises contingent on the faith or the obedience or the belief of the promise of Abraham, then the promise of Abraham is pointless, is what he's saying.

And, but in his original promise, God required absolutely nothing of Abraham.

God promised to give him all the blessings.

Genesis 12, two through three, God says, I will make you a great nation to Abraham.

I will bless you and make your name great and you shall be a blessing.

I will bless those who bless you and I will curse him who curses you and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.

So it was all God.

Abraham had nothing to do with this covenant other than to believe it and receive it.

Just like our salvation, it isn't dependent upon what we do or how clean we are or how good we feel or the things that we can muster up in our own strength.

The salvation is simply by believing and receiving what God has given us through Jesus.

That's it.

And that's the comparison and the point that Paul's making to these Galatians who would have already accepted Jesus, who would have already believed in Jesus and is going like, hey, you guys are believing one thing and then saying another thing and adding on top of it.

Four, verse 18 continues, for if the inheritance comes by the law, it no longer comes by promise, but God gave it to Abraham by a promise.

If the inheritance, our salvation, does not come through the law, then what purpose does the law serve?

Is kind of what Paul is saying.

And then Paul answers the question that he kind of tees up to ask.

Why then the law, verse 19 says, it was added because of transgressions.

So why do we need the law?

The law was given because of sin.

And we get more clarity on Paul's thoughts with his letter to the Romans where he says, therefore, by the deeds of the law, no flesh will be justified in his sight.

For by the law is the knowledge of sin.

It is because of the law that we know sin.

It is because of the 10 commandments.

It is because the whole Mosaic law that now we know, oh yeah, it's wrong to steal.

Scripture would also tell us that the law was written on our hearts.

So deep down, we all know there is a right and a wrong.

And although culturally, things might change, things might shift, yet deep down inside, we know killing is wrong.

We know stealing is wrong.

We know the law is wrong.

Then Paul adds in Romans seven, seven through eight, what shall we say then?

Is the law sin?

Certainly not.

On the contrary, I would not have known sin except through the law.

For I would not have known covetness unless the law had said, you shall not covet.

But sin, taking opportunity by the commandment, produced in me all manner of evil desire for apart from the law, sin was dead.

And like that's the beauty of the law is that it shows us where we've done wrong.

It shows us how we have sinned.

It shows us how we have gone astray.

It shows us that there is a right and a wrong.

So because of man's sinfulness, God sent the law to show us how much we need him.

The verse continues, until the offspring should come to whom the promise had been made.

And it was put in place through angels by an intermediary.

Now an intermediary implies more than one, but God is one.

And so Paul, again, he's capturing the difference between the Abrahamic law, which again came 430 years before the Mosaic law.

And he's putting these two between.

And what we don't really see and understand in the text just by reading it at first glance is the difference of how God communicated with Abraham versus Moses.

So when God communicated with Abraham, he communicated to him plainly.

It was God and Abraham communicating with each other.

And we see this scene in Exodus.

I don't know the exact passage off the top of my head because I didn't write it down.

But in Exodus, we see this scene of Moses asking God to show himself to him.

And God goes like, you can't handle the truth.

And you cannot look at me and I cannot look at you.

So this is what I'm gonna do.

I'm just gonna breeze by you and you can look at my back.

That's literally what he does.

And so he's like, he sees the back of God and then it tells us in the text that there God is communicating to Moses through angels.

So there's an intermediary, right?

Like we just read that there was, and it was put in place through angels by an intermediary.

Now an intermediary implies more than one, but God is one.

So obviously he's going like, it wasn't God.

There was another person there.

It wasn't Jesus because God is one.

Trinity theology, or anyways, we don't have to go down that rabbit trail yet, but he's going, the Mosaic covenant had middlemen.

God dealt with Moses through angels.

Then the Abrahamic covenant had no middleman.

God dealt with Abraham directly.

And it's the same thing for us.

We do not deal with an intermediary.

We deal with Jesus.

We have direct access to Abraham's seed, Jesus, who is God in the flesh.

So again, Paul's like pitting these two against each other.

Not that they are against each other, but they work together.

And one would be gospel, right?

Like Jesus, Abrahamic covenant, that is the gospel.

That it was all God and we just simply receive, we believe in faith.

And then the law, the Mosaic covenant, also known as the law, it's tax and balance.

It's showing us that we cannot attain or obtain what God has for us.

And we need help.

Verse 21, is the law then contrary to the promises of God?

Certainly not.

For if the law had been given that could give life, then righteousness would indeed be by the law.

If God had given the law so that people could save themselves, then what need would there be for his promise to save his people?

Like if we could attain the law, then like we don't need the promise of a savior because we could do it on our own.

We could accomplish it.

But, it says in verse 22, the scripture imprisoned everything under sin so that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.

The law imprisons.

And Paul is, as we'll see next week, Paul is going to add to this like imprisoning language in this imagery of prison.

The law imprisons.

And I mean like even today, that's what the law does.

It puts people in jail.

When you don't abide by the law, you get put in jail.

The law was never meant to give freedom, but quite the opposite.

The law imprisons everything under sin to show Israel and the world that salvation cannot come through the law.

The law imprisons us.

The law shows us that we have a debt to pay.

But there is one who met the standards of the law, breaking us out from the chains and prison cells created by the law to give us freedom and life through faith in him, Jesus Christ.

That is the gospel.

If we try to pursue holiness and sanctification, right?

Like if we try to pursue holiness, if we try to pursue living under the law, solely through obedience to the law, we like Israel are trying to return to the very bondage from which we have been freed.

I'm gonna say that again because it's really good.

If we try to pursue holiness and sanctification solely through obedience to the law, we, you and me, like Israel, are trying to return to the very bondage from which we have been freed.

We have been freed from the power and curse of the law.

We have been freed from trying to obtain everything on our own will, our own power, our own might, our own strength.

We have been freed from that.

We can experience freedom through faith in Christ Jesus.

And Paul is going, you foolish Galatians, do you not see that you are trying to enslave yourself yet again when you have this freedom in Christ Jesus?

Our salvation, this is a lengthy quote from old alive guy.

He's still alive, but he's old.

Not to be confused with old dead guys.

Our salvation is based in the Abrahamic covenant, not the Mosaic covenant.

The Abrahamic covenant finds its fulfillment in Christ, the one who both fulfills the requirement of obedience and bears the curse of the law on behalf of those who look to him in faith.

The law is powerless to give life.

It came 430 years after the covenant promised to Abraham and was given indirectly by God through angels and Moses.

The law nevertheless is not contrary to the gospel promise, but instead drives us to Christ, the one who has fulfilled the obligations of the law.

Law and gospel work in concert to bring about the salvation of God's people, but we must carefully delineate the different functions of law and gospel.

The law threatens and condemns, but the gospel saves.

If these things are true, then we have no other option but to look into the mirror of the law, see our sin, and then flee to Christ in faith for both our justification and sanctification, our conversion and our Christian life.

Therefore, flee to Christ that he might save you from the curse of the law and cause you to walk in God's statutes through the indwelling and sanctifying power of the Holy Spirit.

We must, as believers, understand the difference between the gospel and the law, between faith and works.

We must delineate between the two, or else what happens is we begin to think that our works is what produces our faith.

And it's just human nature, because we love to obtain things.

We love the feeling of getting something done.

We love the feeling of doing it on our own, of feeling independent, of feeling like sufficient, of feeling like enough.

But God, in his sovereignty, from the beginning of time, gave a promise to Abraham saying, I will do this for you.

I will send an offspring who will save you, who will free the curse of sin, who will do what you cannot do.

And I'm going to administer the law to show you how much you suck, to show you how much you lack, to show you how much you cannot live up to me.

But by God's grace, he gave us the answer.

He gave us, he fulfilled the promise through Jesus.

And it is so important that we, for the last three, four weeks, dive into some of this Old Testament covenantal theology, so that we can see and understand like how God has been in control of this for all time.

And again, that's something we know, that's something we might understand, that's something we might grasp.

And yet to read it in a book that is older than all get out, and to see from the very beginning pages and chapters that God said he would do it, and he did it.

And now you and I, in response, get to put our faith in Jesus Christ, who is our Redeemer, who was both fully man and fully God, who lived a perfect life, so that you and I don't have to.

We also get to look at the law and go, you're right, I suck.

You're right, as Paul would say in Romans, what I do, I don't wanna do, what I don't do, I wish I did, the do's and the don'ts and the do-do-do's, like because of my sin nature, because of my humanity, because of my own selfishness and pride, I need help, and I need a savior.

And it is through him that the chains of my thoughts, the chains of my actions, the chains of my life get broken and put to the side, because as Jesus would say, his yoke is easy and his burden is light.

But what that takes is faith in not me, faith in not my works, faith in him and him alone, and knowing that as I put my faith in him and as I walk with him, he begins to transform me from the inside out.

It's not transformation for another person, it's not transformation for your own self, it's through the power of the Holy Spirit living in and through us that creates the ability to look and act and be like Jesus.

And of course we can't do that on our own, because we are not Jesus.

But yet we try to be, and it is so important that we as believers, that we as a church, understand the difference between the gospel and the difference between the law.

Because when times get tough, when life gets hard, what you will try to do is live in the law.

What we try to do is live in the law.

Oh, I can do this on my own, I can accomplish this, I can make this happen, I can, I can, versus living in the gospel, which is God did, God did, God will do, God has done.

There's this kind of like a cheesy preacher saying, differentiating between the law and the gospel.

I guess I had the gospel over here first.

So the law and the gospel.

The law says do, right?

Have to do all these things.

The gospel says done.

It's done, it is finished.

And we have the honor and privilege and ability to live in the finished work of Jesus Christ.

And if it's finished, that means it's done.

You don't have to earn it, you don't have to attain it.

You don't have to try and try and try and try and try.

You can live in the finished work of Jesus Christ.

And that is good news.

And that is what Paul is trying to tell these foolish Galatians and us foolish humans today.
