---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 5:19-26 (part 2)"
date: "2024-08-11T23:48:05.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/90318696/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-7-11%2F78ed6aeb-3e8c-834a-e904-8b77fa8827e5.m4a"
duration: "34:12"
scripture: "Galatians 5:19-26"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>Jesus is the fruit of the Spirit</p>

guid: e00a56a5-d0e3-46e2-97e6-5923c7669800
episode_id: 3f1927b1
---

## Transcription

Last week, we saw how the fruit of the Spirit was not really in...

Oh, let's read first.

Galatians 5.

Galatians 5, if anyone wants to read Galatians 5.

I can do Galatians 5.

The freedom Christ has set us free, stand firm therefore, do not submit again to a yoke of slavery.

Look, I, Paul, say to you that if you accept circumcision, Christ will be of no advantage to you.

I testify again to every man who accepts circumcision, he is obligated to keep the whole laws.

You are exeferred from Christ, you will be justified by the law, you have fallen away from grace.

But through the Spirit, by faith, we ourselves eagerly wait for the hope of the righteousness.

For Christ Jesus, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision counts for anything, but only faith working through love.

He was running well, who hindered you from obeying the truth.

This persuasion is not from him who calls you.

The little leaven leavens the whole lump.

I have confidence in the Lord that he will take no other view, and the one who is troubling you will bear the penalty, whoever he is.

But if I, brothers, still preach circumcision, why am I still being persecuted?

In that case, the offense of the cross has been removed.

I wish those who unsubtle you would emasculate themselves.

For you who are called to freedom, brothers, only do not use your freedom as an opportunity for the flesh, but through love serve one another.

For the whole law is fulfilled in one word, you shall love your neighbor as yourself.

But if you bite and devour one another, watch out that you are not consumed by one another.

When I say walk by the Spirit, you will not gratify the desires of the flesh.

For the desires of the flesh are against the Spirit, and the desires of the Spirit are against the flesh.

For these are opposed to each other, and keep you from doing the things you want to do.

But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.

Now the works of the flesh are evident, sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, hits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, envy, drunkiness, orgies, and things like these.

I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.

But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control.

Against such things there is no law.

And those who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.

We live by the Spirit, but it is also a keeping step of the Spirit.

Let us not become conceited, provoking one another, envying one another.

We saw how fruit was something that God promised and was something that God expected.

And the Israelites, as we saw in the book of Isaiah, were supposed to be this fruit-bearing vineyard.

Yet the fruit that came from Israel was wild fruit, wild grapes, not the fruit-bearing grapes that the winemaker was looking for.

And so what does the winemaker do?

He tears out the vineyards.

But yet there is hope because there is this one shoot from the branch of Jesse that, of course, Jesse being King David's son.

And as we know, Jesus, this is a prophecy of Jesus, how Jesus would come from the family line of David and how Jesus would be this.

Or yeah, how Jesus would be this life-giving fruit and how this how from this stump, from this branch of Jesse, how the whole world would be filled with his fruit.

And of course, now we know that's us.

And so this week we will focus in and see how the fruit of the Spirit is embodied in Jesus and how we are called into this beautiful life-giving Spirit that is Jesus.

And so we'll get a little technical here and just and then, yeah, we'll see.

So because oftentimes when we come to this passage, we can take it in an improper view or not see it in its full context or its full content.

And so technically speaking, we can sort of we can mix up the indicatives of scripture with its imperatives.

What do I mean by that?

Indicatives present a state of affairs, right?

So this happens.

So now this can happen, whereas imperatives give commands.

So as we explore the fruit of the Spirit, we must not forget all the indicatives that Paul has given us thus far.

So the Galatians received by faith alone the outpouring of the Spirit through the work of Jesus.

So that is indicative of Christ's work and the imperative.

So their union with Christ is the indicative, right?

Like Jesus did this.

So now we have this.

And so now Paul, as we just read, could give the Galatians the imperative, the command to love your neighbor as yourself.

So because of right, because of Christ's work for us now, that's that's it's just like in our catechism, the comma between justification, what Christ did for us versus sanctification, what the Spirit is doing in us.

There's a there's a difference.

They're connected, but there's a difference.

It's an order.

And so we just need to be careful as we read this, because if not, then we can think either one, the fruit of the it's not the fruit of the Spirit.

It's the fruit of us that's doing these good works.

Or we could think because not we can think that I need to do these good works to prove my salvation, to prove that God is in me, which is that's not the case either.

It is the we have received by faith alone the outpouring of the Spirit through the work of Jesus.

So our union with Christ, our unity with Christ is based on Jesus's work for us.

And now because of that, the command is love your neighbor as yourself.

And we cannot reverse the order and make the imperatives the means by which we obtain the indicatives.

So we cannot submit our obedience to God's law as the means by which we secure our salvation or our union with Christ.

Rather, our union with Christ enables us to obey the imperatives of scripture.

A 17th century theologian, Benjamin Keach, Keach, put it this way.

You must first have union with God before you ever bring forth fruit to God.

You must act from life, not for life.

Big difference acting from life versus for life.

So as we look at the fruit of the Spirit today, we should remember and see that the Spirit produces his holy fruit within us.

We cannot willpower our way to love, to have joy or to produce peace within our hearts.

And so we need to remember this verse all the way back in Galatians 2 verse 20.

I have been crucified with Christ.

It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me.

And the life I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God who loved me and gave himself for me.

We need to think of the fruit of the Spirit through that vein.

I have been crucified with Christ.

It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me.

And the life I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God who loved me and gave himself for me.

So in this vein, if Christ indwells us through the Spirit, then we should realize that we cannot produce fruit without him.

Paul does not point to ideas about love, let alone define it in a worldly manner.

Rather, he looks to Christ to define the fruit of the Spirit.

So as we look through the fruit of the Spirit, we will look to Jesus and see the fruit in the life and ministry of Jesus.

First, we're going to do this so we can see.

Somebody go back to Galatians 5 and list off for me the fruit of the flesh.

You can start whenever you have it there.

Sexual immorality.

Inherity.

Sensuality.

Idolatry.

Sorcery.

Enmity.

You're a wizard, Harry.

Enmity.

Strive.

Jealousy.

Fits of anger.

Rivalries.

Discentions.

Divisions.

Envy.

Drunkenness.

Orgies.

Envy.

I'm just laughing by myself.

Drunkenness.

Orgies.

And things like these.

And the like.

Okay, now we have the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience.

P-A-T-I-E-N-C-E.

Love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness.

Faithfulness.

Love, joy, peace, patience, goodness, kindness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control.

Self-control.

All right.

Words.

What are words?

Okay, so first we're going to look at love, joy, and peace.

And of course the greatest manifestation of love the world has ever seen is Christ's love for fallen sinners.

And as Jesus told his disciples in John 15, greater love has no one than this, that someone laid down his life for his friends.

But what makes Christ's love astonishing is that he loved us even while we hated him.

Love then is not simply an emotion, a feeling that we might have for another.

As Paul says in 1 Corinthians, So as we look at sexual immorality, right, that's the opposite would be love.

So the world gives us sexual immorality, Jesus gives us love.

Even we can go down to orgies, right, which these are expressions of love without boundaries.

Idolatry, right, we have love.

Idolatry is the love of something other than God.

Enmity is hateful actions towards others made in the image of God.

So we have love over here.

Jealousy, where are you?

Jealous.

Lusting after something that God has seen fit not to give us.

Love is the antidote for jealousy.

Impurity.

Which is the word that Paul uses there is unclean in a moral sense or wrong motives.

So love is the answer to a lot of these, right.

Joy is also not always the warm and fuzzies.

And scripture combines joy and suffering in Jesus's ministry.

We can see it in Hebrews 12, 2, where it says, Jesus, the founder and perfecter of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame and is seated at the right hand of the throne of God.

So we see joy, the joy set before Jesus was the cross, which was where he ultimately suffered.

So joy and suffering, so joy therefore is not just because I'm happy.

Joy is this thing that's much deeper than that.

And if we believe that joy is something we can create for ourselves, then we might lack joy during times of suffering.

But if we recognize that it is a fruit of the Spirit, then as Paul writes, we will be able to rejoice always.

The Spirit produces in us great joy when we seek the Father's will in all things.

We can be filled with joy knowing that God forms Christ in us and that we bring joy to, that we bring glory to him through life's trials.

Elizabeth Elliot, her and her husband Jim and young daughter were missionaries in the Amazonian jungle of Ecuador, where Jim, her husband, was speared to death along with five others in front, like they watched it.

And she put it this way, joy is not the absence of trouble, but the presence of God.

I just think that's an incredible quote, that joy is not the absence of trouble, as we might think it would be, but joy is always the presence of God.

And joy is often accompanied by peace.

Love joy, peace.

Romans 15, 13, May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing so, that by the power of the Holy Spirit you may abound in hope.

Before we came to saving faith in Jesus, we were at war with God.

We are at enmity with God, but Christ is our great peacemaker.

Therefore, Romans 5, Therefore, since we have been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

If we have peace with God through Jesus, then this God-given peace should resound, should permeate the rest of our lives.

We should, as it depends on us, be at peace with all people, but especially with those in the church.

And Jesus broke down the wall, the racial walls, the walls of hostility between Jew and Gentile.

We see this in Galatians 3, 28.

There is neither Jew nor Greek.

There is neither slave nor free.

There is no male and female for all are one in Christ Jesus.

Christ is the church's peace.

Jesus is our peace.

And this was the very thing that the false teachers in the Galatian churches were jeopardizing, were fixating on.

They were rebuilding the wall of division by their insistence on circumcision.

So they were creating strife and rivalries and dissensions, which are the very opposite of peace.

So we have peace over here.

We have peace for strife.

We have peace for rivalries.

Oh, that's a...

Dissensions.

We have divisions.

We have peace.

If the church is united in Christ, it should be marked by peace both corporately and individually.

If you are familiar with the old hymn, It is Well with My Soul, was written by a man who lost his young son.

And then shortly after he lost his home.

They lost their home in the great Chicago fires.

And then while he stayed home and his family was on a boat trip to Europe, that ship sunk in the ocean, only leaving his wife alive.

And after all of this, Horatio Spafford writes, It is well with my soul.

And only one who was filled with the Spirit could have the strength to write such words.

After all of that, when the Holy Spirit produces peace within us, all hell might break loose around us, but we will not be shaken.

Love, joy, peace.

Patience, kindness, goodness.

Most of us have young kids in here.

And so we know the struggles with patience, whether that be a longing for patience when a child is in the middle of a tantrum, or trying to teach them patience when someone else is playing with the toilet they wanted to play with.

And when a world responds with fits of anger, we should respond with patience.

Now I need to change P.

A.

T.

Whatever.

I'm going to switch markers here.

I'll try to find one.

Because things do not immediately go our way, or go as expected or desired, God's people manifest patience.

Set of fits of anger, we should respond with patience, even in the face of annoying or difficult circumstances.

Christ's...

Sorry, my notes just got all wonky.

Where were we?

There we go.

Christ's patience towards His people, even in the face of our faithlessness, is also a manifestation of kindness.

So when someone deserves punishment but receives pardon, this is an act of kindness.

Paul calls our redemption that we see in Christ, Titus 3, 4, the goodness and loving kindness of God our Savior.

So Paul combines goodness and kindness as fruit of the Spirit.

Should also tell us that the two virtues are closely related.

If we have been the recipients of kindness and goodness of God, then we must be kind and good to others around us.

As Paul would say, the present evil age is marked by these fits of anger, which means those who are united in Jesus can shine the light of goodness and kindness.

So instead of fits of anger, Jesus's antidote is... patience, goodness, and kindness.

Which means those who are united...

Oh, I just read that.

Rather than seeking revenge or responding with sarcasm or anger, our desire should be to respond with kindness and goodness.

Faithfulness, gentleness, self-control.

God has been incredibly faithful to His covenant promises throughout all the ages, which is why Paul will write to the Corinthians and 2 Corinthians, In other words, Jesus is the fulfillment of God's promises, and He manifests the faithfulness of our God.

Since faithfulness marks our God, then it should also mark His people.

In a world that is marked by...

If I can get the cap off.

There she goes.

Divisions.

Marked by dissensions.

Marked by jealousy.

God's children should be characterized by loyalty and dependability.

Gentleness and self-control.

Though very different virtues are also closely related, although they have their differences.

And the world around us is often missing these virtues.

People tend to lack self-control in regards to the way they talk.

So they lash out with harsh and cruel words.

People are shameless in their sexuality and sensuality, which is an excess or unbridled lust.

Instead of sensuality, God gives us self-control.

As the recipients of God's grace and Jesus, we should be the gentlest people of all.

God does not immediately give us what we deserve for our sins.

And when sinned against, should we not respond gently?

Should we not respond with self-control?

This is something that Paul will later tell the Galatians to do.

Is to restore in a spirit of gentleness toward a brother who has given offense to the church.

That's Galatians chapter 6 verse 1.

Self-control does not, self-control not just in the way we respond to others, but also the Greek word is literally in reference to our desires, passions, and sensual appetites.

Hebrews 4, 15 says, Jesus was tempted as we are, yet without sin.

Jesus was tempted just as we are, yet without sin.

So Jesus embodied the fruit of the Spirit.

And of course sorcery, we can mark here.

Self-control, why not, right?

Let's not be sorcerers.

Drunkenness.

Drunkenness, again, self-control.

Impurity, sexual immorality, love, self-control.

Where did we miss?

Envy?

Yeah, man.

How about a little peace in your life, you know what I'm saying?

The reason I wanted to do all this was not to like, oh sweet, sweet, sweet.

It's, but a visual for us to see how Paul in the flesh lists out all these things and yet what we should obtain or what the Spirit is, and yet what we should obtain or what the Spirit should do in us is a much shorter list and a much shorter perspective, if you will, but it covers all of that, right?

Just like the fruit of the Spirit was embodied through Christ and is covered through Christ, as we walk with Him, the works of the flesh, although obvious, as we walk with Jesus, these things are covered.

And as we wrap up, two things.

First, we are incapable of affecting our own moral and spiritual transformation.

We cannot do this on our own.

We cannot save ourselves.

Only Christ saves us.

And after the fruit of the Spirit, Paul then writes that, this is Galatians 5.24, and those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.

The only way we will subdue our sinful passions, our sexual immorality, idolatry, anger, drunkenness, and the like, is if Christ redeems us from the rule of Satan's sin and death.

And Jesus puts to death our sinful nature with its passions and desires.

And once freed, we must seek the power of the Holy Spirit so that He can continue to produce the fruit of the Spirit in us.

Galatians 5.25, if we live by the Spirit, let us also keep in step with the Spirit.

And this second thing to remember, the second part is, Okay, so yes, we understand that the fruit of the Spirit is from God, it is from the Spirit.

So then how come we don't see it in our lives?

How come sometimes we lack seeing the fruit of the Spirit in our lives?

And the answer is sin.

Imagine that.

Part of the reason many of us struggle to manifest the fruit of the Spirit is that we are unwilling to look into the mirror of the law so that we can identify our sin.

Or maybe, having looked at the law, we find our sin, but are unwilling to repent of it, turn from it, seek Christ, and walk in the Spirit.

It's time to look in the mirror.

It's time for a fruit check.

If a good farmer or a good gardener does not just plant the seed, water it, then forget about it.

No.

Jesus is our gardener.

John 15, I am the vine, you are the branches.

Whatever is in you that does not bear fruit, he prunes.

So let Jesus be the gardener that he is, and let him check the fruit.

Let him pluck and pull the fruit of our lives so that we may be holy and pleasing unto God.

If you regularly fail to manifest the fruit of the Spirit, may I suggest that part of the answer to your wrestling with God lies in the absence of repentance.

We must look at ourselves in the mirror and ask Jesus, through the Word and the Spirit, to convict you of your sin that you might turn from it, flee to him, and walk by the Spirit.

Our desires, prayers, and actions should reflect that we are marked by the fruit of the Spirit and not the works of the flesh.

We must pray that you will be so marked that you might edify, might be an encouragement, might be the beauty of the body of Christ and bring glory to him.

But we cannot do that unless we first allow the gardener to dig up and take up the parts of us that are still the old flesh.

Because although we are saved and redeemed, we still are sinful beings.

And we must allow the Holy Spirit to convict and challenge and change us so that we can see the fruit of the Spirit manifest in our lives.

That's all I got.
