---
layout: sermon
title: "Galatians 5:7-15"
date: "2024-07-21T19:15:15.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/89491665/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-6-21%2F9399a59a-b07f-3e84-673b-6e4bbdc1e547.m4a"
duration: "19:53"
scripture: "Galatians 5:7-15"
series: Galatians
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: For you were called to freedom, brothers. Only do not use your freedom as an opportunity for the flesh, but through love serve one another. \n
guid: 7737d08e-771c-4cb6-9265-3c8e8814e503
episode_id: 122ca76c
---

For you were called to freedom, brothers. Only do not use your freedom as an opportunity for the flesh, but through love serve one another.

## Transcription

Galatians chapter 5 and we're gonna focus in on verses 7 through 15 but why don't we read all of chapter 5 and then we can go from there.

Yes please.

Okay.

You who will be justified by the law, you have fallen away from grace.

For through the Spirit, I faith, we ourselves eagerly wait for the hope of righteousness.

For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision counts, but only faith working through that.

You were running well.

Who hindered you from obeying the truth?

This persuasion is not from him who calls you.

A little leaven leavens the whole lump.

I have confidence in the Lord that you will take no other view and the one who is troubling you will bear the penalty, whoever he is.

But if I, brothers, still preach circumcision, why am I still being persecuted?

In that case, the offense of the cross has been removed.

I wish those who unsettle you would emasculate themselves.

For you were called to freedom, brother.

Only do not use your freedom as an opportunity for the flesh, but through love serve one another.

For the whole law is fulfilled in one word.

You shall love your neighbor as yourself.

But if you fight and devour one another, watch out that you are not consumed by one another.

But I say walk by the Spirit and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh.

For the desires of the flesh are against the Spirit and the desires of the Spirit are against the flesh.

For these are opposed to the Spirit to keep you from doing the things you want to do.

But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.

Now the works of the flesh are evident.

Sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, envy, drunkenness, orgies, and things like these.

I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.

But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control.

Against such things there is no law.

And those who believe in Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.

If we live by the Spirit, let us also keep in step with the Spirit.

Let us not become conceited provoking one another and being one another.

Awesome.

So we start this passage, verse seven and eight.

You were running well.

Who hindered you from obeying the truth?

This persuasion is not from him who calls you.

And you can kind of hear the brotherly and pastoral tone of Paul here, right, who is going like, you were doing such a great job.

You were running well.

You were doing well.

Who or what got into your school to stop you from obeying the truth of the gospel?

Who persuaded you?

Because this is clearly not from God.

Who is the one who called you?

And this, I asked in my head as I was doing this and reading through this was, so how do we test if something is from God or not from God?

And of course the scripture.

That's how we test.

And of course because the Holy Spirit will never go against the book that he wrote.

It's really that simple, but it takes something from us, which is us knowing the scripture and learning the scripture, as well as having godly community and godly counsel.

Why?

Because you will never, we will never know the all of the scripture even as we try.

And as we have godly counsel and godly community around us, who are also in the word, who are also seeking God, that allows us to in a safe place test whether it be something we think or test what we've heard, what's been spoken over us, and ask the question, does this align with scripture?

Does this not align with scripture and so on.

So you were running well.

Who hindered you from obeying the truth?

This persuasion is not from him who calls you them.

Verse 9, a little leaven leavens the whole lump.

And thankfully I've got a lot of breadmakers and bread eaters in here.

And so you would know how a little bit of yeast makes its way through the whole loaf, right?

And in scripture, usually when yeast is mentioned, it's never a good thing.

And so when Paul is saying it takes just a yeast, just a little bit of yeast to ruin the whole lump, right?

It just takes a yeast amount of doubt or wrong thinking to ruin your whole loaf, to ruin the whole thing.

And the same was true for the Galatians.

Just a little bit of false teaching will cause evil, sin and wickedness to work its way through all the churches of Galatia, infiltrating the lives of both the individual and the congregation.

There's a commentator that I reference and look at quite frequently, his name is Warren Wiersbie, and he said this quote, The spirit of legalism does not suddenly overpower a church.

Like leaven, it is introduced secretly, it grows and before long poisons the whole assembly.

In most cases, the motives that encourage legalism are good.

We want to have a more spiritual church, but the methods are not scriptural.

It is not wrong to have standards in a church, but we should never think that the standards will make anybody spiritual, or that keeping of the standards is an evidence of spirituality.

How easy it is for the yeast to grow.

Before long, we become proud of our spirituality.

Puffed up is the way Paul would put it in Second Corinthians, and that's exactly what yeast does.

It puffs up.

And then critical of everybody else's lack of spirituality.

This, of course, only feeds the flesh and grieves the spirit, but we go on our way thinking we are glorifying God.

Every Christian has the responsibility to watch for the beginnings of legalism.

That first bit of yeast that infects the fellowship and eventually grows into a serious problem.

A little leaven, leaven is a whole lump, then what's Paul's response in verse 10?

I have confidence in the Lord that you will take no other view, and the one who is troubling you will bear the penalty whoever he is.

Paul is assured that the truth will reign supreme in their lives.

Jesus said in Matthew 24, Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.

Right, John one, in the beginning was the word, the word is with God, the word was God, the Lord will lead them back to the truth, because the Lord is truth.

And those who teach falsely will pay the price.

And James is very clear in his letter that teachers are judged with greater strictness.

God cares about the truth and will judge those who teach accordingly.

And Paul knows this.

Verse 11, but if I brothers still preach circumcision, why am I still being persecuted?

In that case, the offense of the cross has been removed.

What we can kind of gauge from this, the first part of the verse here, but if I brothers still preach circumcision, Paul was probably being accused of teaching circumcision.

And Paul is going, if that's the case, then why am I still being persecuted?

If I'm agreeing with what they're saying, then why?

Why am I being persecuted?

Why why are why are why are people running me out of cities?

If if what I'm teaching goes with what they're saying?

Right.

And then he goes, the offense of the cross has been removed, which this isn't something that I think we like to talk about, because we like to live in our own efforts.

But legalism can't handle the offense of the cross.

The whole point of Jesus dying on the cross was to say, you cannot save yourself.

I must die in your place and or you have absolutely no hope at all.

Right.

That is the offense of the cross that we don't have any part to play in it that we cannot earn the cross.

Well, we did earn the cross, but in the opposite way that the point he's making here.

So when we trust in legalism, we believe that we can or at least in part of us believe that we can save ourselves, which takes away the offense of the cross, which should always offend the nature of fallen man.

In this sense, the offense of the cross is really the glory of the cross.

And legally, legalism takes away the glory takes this glory away.

Right.

When we change that for the glory of the cross, the glory of the cross being that we didn't have to do it on our own, we still don't have to do it on our own.

We can just put our faith in Jesus.

That is the glory of the cross.

So Paul concludes this paragraph saying, verse 12, I wish those who unsettle you would emasculate themselves.

He wishes the false teachers who have unsettled the faith in the faith that they had in Jesus that Paul came with would go beyond circumcision to emasculation.

That's a song, a very strong statement and was probably said with a little bit of sarcasm.

But I would not count the words of Paul meaningless.

And because and obviously Paul has spoken many times with very serious words and serious tones.

We can go all the way back to Galatians 1,9.

As we have said before, so now I say again, if anyone is preaching to you a gospel contrary to the one you received, let him be accursed.

Right.

So he's he's hurled curses at them.

He's told them to emasculate themselves.

One in the same.

Tomato, tomato.

It's a joke.

And I think, well, as I was studying and looking this up, there's a serious ramification in the law to emasculation.

And so those who would have been familiar with the law, who would have been familiar with the requirements of the law, would have understood this statement to emasculate themselves as an exclusion from the covenant and from the presence of God.

In Deuteronomy 23, it says, So the listeners or readers of this letter who were familiar with the law when they got to this part where Paul says, I wish you would emasculate themselves.

He's going, I wish you would be cut off from the presence of God because of what you are teaching and doing to these fellow believers.

And so some very serious rebuke to the Judaizers who were teaching this heresy to the Galatian Church.

And then Paul gets back to the main point with verses 13 through 15, where he says, So Paul's getting back to the point and saying that they slash we have been called to freedom.

Let us not fall back under the old law or fall under your old flesh.

But Paul, again, in step with Jesus, says the whole law is fulfilled in one word, love your neighbor as yourself, which of course, Jesus said, love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind and strength, and love your neighbor as yourself.

But Paul, again, affirms Jesus's teaching here.

And then he continues, But if you buy and devour one another, watch out, you'll be consumed by one another.

And last week, we talked about justification, which of course, justification means our declared righteousness before God made possible by Christ's death and resurrection for us.

And this week, we can see sanctification, which means our gradual growing righteousness made possible by the Spirit's work in us.

Our gradual growing righteousness made possible by the Spirit is love.

Love replaces the law.

And when we think about it, that's the crazy thing about love.

When you love your neighbor because you love Jesus or because Jesus loved you, you will not steal from them, lie about them, envy them, or try to hurt them.

Love in the heart is God's substitute for laws and threats.

Love in the heart is God's substitute for laws and threats.

And Paul lays out for us here that because of this freedom that we have in Jesus, what's our response to that freedom?

Our response isn't to go on just living as we would before.

Our response to that freedom is through love, serve one another.

We do not love others because it's the right thing to do.

We love from a place of love.

We love because God first loved us, 1 John.

We do not use this freedom in Christ to do whatever we please.

We use this freedom in Christ to be like Christ.

We can understand the offense of the cross and our response is to do as he did.

Our response is to serve and love others.

It's the fruit of the Spirit.

And this can only happen by the Spirit.

This is not something we can accomplish on our own.

It is only by the Spirit.

Or if we try to live by legalism or live under the law, or the pursuit of salvation by faith and works, results in cursing, death, bondage, division, and strife.

If we look to secure our standing by works, then we will immediately begin to compare ourselves to one another and seek to establish a hierarchy based on personal achievements.

This path automatically leads to division, strife, self-seek and self-seeking, which is why Paul warns the Galatians about devouring one another.

So Paul is saying you serve one another through love, which would be the results of salvation and justification by grace alone, through faith alone.

And from that comes sanctification, the gradual growing process of becoming more like Christ, which can only happen through the Spirit working in us.

And that is love.

Or you can believe your justification comes by your faith and works, which results in legalism and results in comparing and creating a hierarchy of I'm better than them.

I'm more like Christ than them.

I don't do this.

So it makes me a good person.

I don't do that.

So it makes me a good person.

And then we begin to devour one another and tear down one another.

If on the other hand, we seek our justification and salvation by grace alone, through faith alone, in Christ alone, we receive the outpouring of the Spirit, which prompts and empower us to love one another.

Love is God's substitute for the law.

And we his followers must do the same.

We are his disciples, which again, a disciple is someone who hears the voice of Jesus and does what he says.

And he calls us to love.

And so I got love.

I want to know what love is.

I want you to show me.
