---
layout: sermon
title: John 1:29-51
date: 2024-09-22T13:33:09.000Z
category: sermon
audio_url: https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/92081106/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2024-8-23%2F3dddf311-0eb2-858b-a684-544ebd1aa7f9.m4a
duration: 27:51
scripture: John 1:29-51
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: "Behold the Lamb of God"
guid: cc975cec-0918-4d43-bf5e-e3c13e6d0124
episode_id: deae1593
---


<p>Behold the <em><strong>Lamb of God</strong></em></p>

## Transcription

This morning we will be finishing, excuse me, chapter 1, but for our reading, why don't we start at verse John 1 verse 19 and we'll read through the end of the chapter. 1 19 and we'll read through the end of chapter 1.

Who are you?

We need to give an answer to those who sent us.

What do you say about yourself?

He said, I am the voice of one crying out in the wilderness.

Make straight the way of the Lord, as the prophet Isaiah said.

Now they have been sent from the Pharisees.

They asked him, then why are you baptizing if you are neither Christ nor Elijah or the prophet?

John answered them, I baptize with water, but among you stands one you do not know.

Even he who comes after me, the strap of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.

These things took place in Bethany across the Jordan where John was baptizing.

The next day he saw Jesus coming toward him and he said, behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.

This is he of whom I said, after me comes a man who ranks before me, because he was before me.

I myself did not know him, but for this purpose I came baptizing with water that he might be revealed to Israel.

And John bore witness, I saw the Spirit descend from heaven like a dove and it remained on him.

I myself did not know him, but he who sent me to baptize with water said to me, he on whom you see the Spirit descend and remain, this is who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.

And I have seen and have borne witness that this is the Son of God.

The next day again John was standing with two of his disciples and he looked at Jesus as he walked by and he said, behold the Lamb of God.

The two disciples heard him say this and they followed Jesus.

Jesus turned and saw them following.

He said to them, what are you seeking?

And they said to him, Rabbi, which means teacher, where are you staying?

He said to them, come and you will see.

So they came and saw where he was staying and they stayed with him that day, for it was about the tenth hour.

One of the two who heard John speak and followed Jesus was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother.

He first found his own brother Simon and said to him, we have found the Messiah, which means Christ.

He brought him to Jesus.

Jesus looked at him and said, you are Simon, the son of John.

You shall be called Cephas, which means Peter.

The next day Jesus decided to go to Galilee.

He found Philip and said to him, follow me.

Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.

Philip found Nathaniel and said to him, we have found him of whom Moses and the law and also the prophets wrote, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.

Nathaniel said to him, can anything good come out of Nazareth?

Philip said to him, come and see.

Jesus saw Nathaniel coming toward him and said, behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no deceit.

Nathaniel said to him, how do you know me?

Jesus answered him, before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.

Nathaniel answered him, Rabbi, you are the son of God, you are the king of Israel.

Jesus answered him, because I said to you, I saw you under the fig tree, do you believe?

You will see greater things than these.

And he said to him, truly, truly, I say to you, you will see heaven open and the angels of God ascending and descending on the son of man.

A lot here, but one thing I want to focus in on, last week, we answered the question of who is John the Baptist, and this week, I, in part, want to answer the question, who is Jesus?

Of what we see in the text, how is Jesus being described?

And obviously, this isn't a full breakdown of who Jesus is, but what we can see in this chapter of the fourth gospel.

So we're looking at who is Jesus, and before, I guess, first to answer the question, we're going to play a game.

So there are a few, huh?

We, so through, let's just go, I think through verses 29 through 51, we're going to, if you find it, say it out loud, we're looking for the titles or the names of which they use for Jesus, okay?

Verses 29 through 51, the verses we're looking at today, the name, boom, there's one, all right, we're going, we're going.

Rabbi, got it, son of God, got it.

Boom.

King of Israel.

King of Israel.

Messiah's in there, yes.

Son of man.

Son of man.

Yep.

You got them all.

Lamb of God, Son of God, technically Lamb of God twice, Son of God.

And then we see Rabbi or teacher, then we see Messiah, and we see again, King of Israel, which in its context, Rabbi, you are the Son of God, which they're two, Son of God, you are the King of Israel.

And then Jesus describes himself as the Son of man.

But one, one of the names I want to focus in on, which is, I've actually found to be quite interesting, and something that I think we probably take for, I wouldn't say take for granted, but John the Baptist uses twice to describe Jesus as the Lamb of God, right?

Verse 29, verse 29, uh, the Lamb of God, right?

Verse 29, behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.

Then later he sees Jesus, I believe it's the next day.

Yes, the next day he's standing there with his disciples and Jesus walks by and John the Baptist said, Hey, look, it's my cousin.

But instead he goes, behold the Lamb of God.

Um, and so, uh, I think it's quite interesting.

Actually, the term used there is Agnes Dei, um, or which means Lamb of God, and it's only used in two books of the New, of the New Testament.

Um, and both of them are written by John.

So, uh, obviously we're reading it here.

And then John, uh, in the book of Revelation, which, uh, he wrote while he was exiled on the Isle of Patmos, uh, which for those who are geographically centered, that's an island off the coast of modern day Turkey, which seems delightful.

Uh, he writes in Revelation five, were these the Lamb who was slain to receive power and wealth and wisdom and honor and glory and blessing.

Um, and the fact that only John references, behold the Lamb or the Lamb of God, is actually, it's kind of a point of contention for some biblical scholars because some point out that when we look to the Old Testament, uh, we cannot find lambs being used for sin.

Uh, in sin offerings, bulls and goats were used as the, uh, were used.

And then we see, uh, which the story our children are learning about today, the scapegoat.

Uh, again, that's a goat which was cast out.

All the sins from the people were thrown on this goat and they cast him out of the, uh, of the camp and, uh, the goat went bye-bye.

And so, uh, thus the term scapegoat, right?

All the blame went on the goat and kicked him out.

So, uh, so the critics who question this are, are essentially saying like, where does, is this an idea that John made up?

Where is the, uh, historical context or relevance to the Lamb and the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world?

And their conclusion is that the Apostle John, uh, made this idea up and put it into the mouth of John the Baptist, since there was no, um, there was nothing that came before it, right?

We don't have a New, or an Old Testament scriptural basis for it.

Um, others argue that we do see the Lamb, uh, the Lamb metaphors in the Old Testament.

We see it in Isaiah 53 verse 7, um, which describes the suffering servant, uh, which is describing Jesus.

And, um, in that, it says, And so, some argue that this is referencing, obviously, a lamb.

And then the counter argument to that is, well, he's not called the Lamb of God, they're using the lamb as a metaphor.

Um, but the kind of overarching, the argument to that Lamb of God is not, uh, who takes away the sins of the world is not, uh, found in the Old Testament, is also kind of meh for a couple reasons.

And I'll get to them now.

And, um, if you think it's, if you think it's cool, then sweet.

I, I, anyways, uh, like we talked about last week, John the Baptist is a, was the last Old Testament prophet, which would give him the power, authority, and also the ability for fresh revelation to describe to describe the prophet.

Again, that's a reference to last week, to describe the Messiah, to describe the one who was to come.

So we've got that, that we can counter with.

The other counter would be just look at scripture and see the Old Testament.

We can go all the way back to Genesis 22, um, where God calls Abraham to sacrifice his promised son, Isaac.

And as they trek up Mount Moriah, Abraham in obedience to God builds up an altar and is prepared to sacrifice his son.

But then God steps in and stops Abraham and provides a ram that is caught in the thicket.

Again, a ram is a male sheep, also a truck, but that's neither here nor there.

Um, and wouldn't be surprised to find a ram caught in the thicket though.

I'm just kidding.

Um, uh, and this is the first substitutionary sacrifice, um, that the atonement for Jesus comes from.

Those are big words.

I'm about to break them down.

So this substitutionary sacrifice, so Jesus steps in our place, right?

Like a tag team of all lifetime.

He, we're on the fence, we're on the ropes because sin has knocked us out.

Our, uh, to keep in line with the metaphor and Jesus tags us in or tags himself in and he takes the final punishment or the, uh, knockout of sin upon him.

Uh, and so Jesus substitutes himself for us for our sin.

Just as God provided a ram or a male sheep, uh, for Abraham, God provides Jesus for us to be the sacrifice that takes away our sin and the sins of the world.

So we see that.

And then the next stop in our lamb venture, see what I did there, uh, is in Exodus 12 at the first Passover, uh, where God is about to bring the final plague on the, uh, Egyptians and the, that plague being the death of every firstborn son of the Egyptians.

But he tells Moses and the Israelites to slay a lamb without blemish and to spread the blood over the doorposts, uh, so that death will pass over, right?

Their home, their homes and they all would live.

So just as those lambs cause the people of Israel to be spared from God's wrath, the spotless, without blemish lamb of God shed his blood to redeem his people from the penalty that is due for us and our sin.

So it's pretty easy to say, or it's pretty easy to see that when John says, behold the lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world, his claim is not baseless, right?

There is very clear scripture of him taking this idea of the lamb or the metaphor of the lamb or the shadow or type of lamb and placing that same, uh, substitutionary sacrifice on, that was on the ram caught in the thicket that was on the lamb that was slain for the Passover of, uh, the Israelites.

He puts that on Jesus and says, this is the lamb of God.

Who not just takes away the sins of Israel or the, uh, or fulfills the obedience of Abraham, but it's on the entire world.

Um, very easy to see that.

Um, and as we see in the first chapter of here back in John, Jesus is titled many things and we must also not think that these people had a full picture of who Jesus was, uh, or a full grasp on what the Messiah meant.

So John, the Baptist, somewhat in faith says, this is the lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.

But John, the Baptist did not have the full picture of what Jesus was going to do or what that meant.

Um, and we can see this in Luke chapter seven, John, the Baptist is thrown into prison and he sends some messengers to Jesus.

And so John, the Baptist is in prison and he sends these messengers to, to Jesus.

And they ask in Luke chapter seven, verse 20, they ask, are you the one who is to come or shall we look for another?

So, are you the one who is to come or shall we look for another?

So again, this is the same John, the Baptist who weeks, months, years earlier, we don't have the per the picture, perfect timeline, but earlier on, before he was in prison, called out to Jesus, not just once, but twice, behold the lamb of God takes away the sins of the world.

Uh, then again, to his disciples, to his closest, uh, companions and confidants says again, look, there's the lamb of God.

Then later he sends messengers when he's in prison and he's going, I need you to go ask Jesus if he is the one to come or if there's another one coming.

So John, the Baptist in confidence said that Jesus was the lamb of God.

And he also wasn't sure.

Why?

Because just like you and me, John, the Baptist had his own assumptions of what the, of what the Messiah was supposed to do and how he was supposed to act.

He expected that the lamb of God would come and drive out the Romans, just like Jesus did.

He expected that the lamb of God would come and drive out the Romans, just like so many other Jews of the time thought.

And so when Jesus was going about preaching and healing and, and doing what Jesus did, John, the Baptist became confused.

He was like, I thought this was the lamb of God who was supposed to free us from the Roman rule.

Why is this guy teaching?

Why is this guy going about and healing people and doing miracle?

What's, was I wrong?

He's doubting himself.

And Jesus responds to John, the Baptist messengers back in Luke chapter seven.

He says, go and tell John what you have seen and heard.

The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear.

The dead are raised up and the poor have good news preached to them and blessed is the one who is not offended by me.

So Jesus in response, he points to his miracles to confirm his identity for John, the Baptist, who is doubting.

He also references this messianic prophecy in Isaiah 61, where in Isaiah 61, it says, the spirit of the Lord is upon me because the Lord has anointed me to bring good news to the poor.

He has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives and to end the opening of the prison to those who are bound to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor.

I'm going to read what Jesus said in Luke chapter seven again, and then I'll read that Isaiah chapter again.

So you can, if you didn't catch it, you can hear him referencing this and I'll read it.

Go and tell John that you have seen and heard.

The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear.

The dead are raised up.

The poor have good news preached to them and blessed is the one who is not offended by me.

The spirit of the Lord God is upon me because the Lord has anointed me to bring good news to the poor.

He has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives and the opening of the prison to those who are bound to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor.

So he is referencing this Old Testament prophecy, essentially going, the things that I'm doing, these are the signs, these are the miracles that I'm doing, this is the signs so that you would believe in me, so that you would believe that I am from God.

Don't you remember the scripture?

Don't you remember what Isaiah wrote?

I'm doing those things that it was said to do.

Do you not believe?

Jesus is the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.

He is the Messiah.

He is the stone that the builders rejected who has become the cornerstone.

He is the Son of God.

He is the great Rabbi.

He is the King of Israel.

Even when we doubt him, even when we don't feel like he is or even when we feel like he's not doing what he's wanted, like what we want him to do, he is who he is and we cannot change him and thank God that he doesn't change.

And so John, in this first chapter, so beautifully tells us what is to come in those first 18 verses and then he gets right into it of John the Baptist and then we get all these names of God who, and of course we get Jesus calling his disciples and there's so much in here.

There's so much in here.

But I think what I really wanted us to see is one, that Jesus is the Son of God.

Jesus is also the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.

And in my own life, there are times where I doubt that and where I neglect that and I let the circumstances of the world, I resonate so much with John the Baptist who is in prison, who will later be beheaded.

And he's like, is this Jesus?

Is he who he says he is?

And Jesus just goes, I am.

I am.

As we will see in this fourth gospel, I am the bread of life.

I am the good shepherd.

I am the way, the truth, and the life and no one comes to the Father but through me.

What a claim to say that you are the one?

That's crazy.

And his disciples doubted him.

Even the prophet who came in the spirit and power of Elijah doubted him.

And so know you are in good company when you doubt, but also know that Jesus is unchanging, that Jesus did what he said he would do.

Yeah.

And let us not forget too that this was like John the Baptist.

Again, he saw the Spirit descend on him in the form of a dove and he heard, we don't get it in John, but we can look to the other gospels and see that the heavens opened and a voice from heaven said, this is my son whom I love in which I am well pleased.

And then the Spirit descends like a dove on Jesus when he's baptized.

And John experienced all those things and then yet still doubted him, which we have to sometimes deconstruct our own thoughts and opinions of what it sometimes means to be a follower of Jesus because we've subscribed to lesser versions of Jesus or don't understand fully or maybe we've been preached a different gospel, whether it be a prosperity gospel, a false gospel, a works gospel, whatever it might be, but sometimes we have to deconstruct and actually read the word for what it says and what it is and understand that Jesus is who he says he is.

He did what he said he did and he is seated where he said he would be seated and he will return when his heavenly father says so.

And so let us, as we open up this book, this is a Bible that I got when I was in college and I have some little notes here and I'm like, dude, what were you thinking?

Like this is like, not that it's not wrong, but it's not good.

I'm not going to tell you what this little note says, but I'm like, dude, what is going on with you back then because you are so far off and so missing the point.

And I think as we start here, we need to just get recalibrated and let us not miss the point that we are reading the story and testimony of Jesus Christ the Messiah.

And we must take him at his word and yeah, that's all I got.
