---
layout: sermon
title: John 10:22-42
date: 2025-03-02T12:23:05.000Z
category: sermon
audio_url: https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/99295267/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-2-3%2F395869750-44100-2-1dde54e49751c.m4a
duration: 26:59
scripture: John 10:22-42
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: "Jesus and the Father are one."
guid: ad5b545f-53fc-4e26-807a-eff590bc6352
episode_id: eb591930
---


## Transcription

John 10 looking at verses 22.

For some reason, I know it's the same amount of time from last Sunday to this Sunday, but for some reason it feels like it's been a long time.

Yeah.

I hope that was true.

Okay.

Maybe it was just our time of prayer and worship that just took us to a different place, you know?

So all praise be to God.

John 10, starting in verse 22.

If somebody wants to read that through the end of the chapter and we can jump right in after.

I can read it.

At the time the Feast of Dedication took place at Jerusalem, it was winter and Jesus was walking in the temple in the Kallonad of Solomon.

So the Jews gathered around him and said to him, how long will you keep us in suspense?

If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.

Jesus answered them, I told you and you did not believe.

The works that I do in my Father's name bear witness about me, but you do not believe because you are not among my sheep.

My sheep hear my voice and I know them and they follow me.

I give them eternal life and they will never perish and no one will snatch them out of my hand.

My Father who has given them to me is greater than all and no one is able to snatch them out of my Father's hand.

I and the Father are one.

The Jews picked up the stones to stone.

Jesus answered them, I have shown you many good works from the Father for which of them are you going to stone me?

The Jews answered them, it is not for a good work that we are going to stone you, but for blasphemy because you being a man make yourself God.

Jesus answered them, is it not written in your law, I said you are God's.

If we call them God's to whom the word of God came and scripture cannot be broken, do you say of him whom the Father consecrated and sent to the world you are blaspheming because I said I am the Son of God.

If I am not doing the works of my Father then do not believe me, but if I do them, even though you do not believe me, believe the works that you may know and understand that the Father is in me and I am in the Father.

Again they sought to arrest him but he escaped from their hands.

He went away again across the Jordan to the place where John had been baptizing at first and there he remained.

And many came to him and they said John did no sin but everything that John said about this man was true and many believed in him there.

Awesome.

So this text starts with some details that are truthfully kind of irrelevant to us but completely relevant to the initial readers and receivers of this letter.

And it starts with some details on the Feast of Dedication which this feast will actually not be found in your Bible.

You can't turn to the Old Testament and find it because it originated in 164 BC.

So Old Testament texts were already written and this festival was actually created.

The temple was taken over by foreigners and it was defiled.

And so the Jews they got their temple back and created this feast dedicating the temple back to Yahweh.

And so that's some of the details on that festival.

Again not very important to us but very important to the first initial readers because again it brings some historical context and maybe you have a neighbor or a friend or somebody who would have been in the temple in the colonnade of Solomon and was an eyewitness to this interaction.

So again these are details that are not important to us but would have been incredibly important to the first initial readers and people who would have been alive and well and you can go hey you know were you there for this?

The Feast of Dedication all these things did you see this Jesus guy?

Again anyway so great details for history.

Anyways verse 24.

So the Jews gathered around him and said to him how long will you keep us in suspense?

If you are the Christ tell us plainly.

The Jews were like hey Jesus we're cool right?

Like well you just like let me know just like just give it to me straight dude.

Like are you the Christ?

And Jesus answered them verse 25.

I told you and you do not believe.

The works that I do in my Father's name bear witness about me but you do not believe me because you are not among my sheep.

My sheep hear my voice.

I know them and they follow me.

Let's remember this illustration from last week that Jesus used earlier in this chapter.

The community would have a community sheep pen and all of the people's sheep, all the neighborhood sheep would go into the sheep pen.

There would be a shepherd who would watch them overnight and many different shepherds would put their sheep in the community pen.

Then in the morning each shepherd would call their sheep and the sheep would recognize their shepherd's voice.

Jesus is essentially saying you do not believe me because you are not my sheep.

I've done these miracles among you in my Father's name but you still don't believe me.

What's wrong?

Is it me?

Is it my miracles or do you just or are you just simply not my sheep?

Which for me this question leads to what do Jesus's sheep do?

What do Jesus's sheep do?

He tells us they hear his voice.

He knows them, right?

We're known by him and they follow him.

Sheep hear him, know him, follow him.

Verse 28 continues, I give them eternal life and they will never perish and no one will snatch them out of my hand.

My Father who has given them to me is greater than all and no one is able to snatch them out of the Father's hand.

Another question, what does the shepherd do?

The shepherd gives eternal life because he is eternal so he is giving what is already his.

We will never perish because he will never perish.

We will not be snatched.

No one can take what Jesus has already purchased.

There is a zero return policy.

You might have ever wondered if you can lose your salvation.

What these words from Jesus show us is if you have it, you never lose it and if you lose it, you probably never had it.

Jesus says no one will snatch them out of my hand.

My Father who has given them to me is greater than all and no one is able to snatch them out of the Father's hand.

If you are saved, you will always be saved.

Question could be, well what about someone who was saved and then they leave the faith?

Maybe they were never saved in the first place or maybe God's not done with them yet and they are a prodigal on their journey and the Father who is greater than all is awaiting their return.

These are questions we would love to know the answer to but I believe these answers are not for us to know.

If you have a friend like this in your life or a family member, I would ask, are you praying for them?

Are you being a witness to them?

Maybe more questions but kind of the other side of the coin.

Are you enabling them?

Do you need to speak the truth and love to them?

I cannot answer these questions for you but I do know prayer is a great place to start.

In these verses and verse 30 below we see Jesus say, my Father who has given them to me is greater than all and no one is able to snatch them out of the Father's hand.

I and the Father are one.

We see this oneness.

We see this unity.

No one can snatch them from Jesus's hand and no one is able to snatch them from the Father's hand.

So which is it?

Is it Jesus's hand?

Is it the Father's hand?

It's both.

The Son, the Father, along with the Spirit are all one.

This is something that differentiates us from our Mormon and Jehovah Witness friends.

They would argue that Jesus and God are not one but they just shared the same message or the same mission of God.

They deny that Jesus is God and they do not interpret Jesus's words as his admitting that he is God.

And this idea of Jesus and God being one is all over John.

In the beginning was the Word.

The Word was with God.

The Word was God.

Right?

Later in John Jesus will pray again that his disciples will be one like God and the Father are one.

So you pretty much have to throw the whole book of John out to say that Jesus was not claiming to be God and some people do like to do that.

But we don't.

And the Jews knew that Jesus was making this claim of him being God by their actions to follow.

Verse 31.

The Jews picked up stones again to stone him.

They did not pick up stones just because that was the fun way to kill someone.

But the punishment for blasphemy in the law, in the Mosaic law, was stoning.

So them picking up stones was in fact the Jews agreeing with Jesus's claim to be God and they're like, no, you're not and so we are going to stone you.

Verse 32.

The Jews answered them.

I have shown you many good works from the Father.

For which of them are you going to stone me?

The Jews answered him.

It is not for a good work that we are going to stone you, but for blasphemy because you being a man make yourself God.

They got the order wrong.

You being God made yourself a man.

Why do you want to stone me?

Jesus says.

He's like, I've shown you my works that I've done in the Father's name.

You've seen me heal.

You've seen me multiply.

You've seen me do these miracles.

So what's wrong with you?

And the Jews tell him it's not because of his works, but for making himself equal with God.

Verse 34.

Jesus answers them.

Is it not written in your law?

I said you are God's.

If he called them God's to whom the word of God came and scripture cannot be broken, do you say of him who the Father consecrated and sent into the world, you are blaspheming because I said I am the Son of God?

If I am not doing the works of my Father, then do not believe me.

But if I do them, even though you do not believe me, believe the works that you may know and understand that the Father is in me and I am in the Father.

This is a big chunk of scripture that just by simply the wording can be a little confusing based on how it's written.

And so I'm going to read this same passage from the New Living Translation because if you ever come at a spot in scripture and you're like, that's really confusing, I don't really understand it, flip to a different translation.

Like you don't need to know the Greek or Hebrew.

There's been great study that goes into a lot of great Bibles, whether it be the ESV, NIV, NLT, and you can use scripture to interpret scripture.

That's just a little life hack.

So let me read this out of the NLT and it makes a little more sense.

I say you are God's.

Pause real quick.

Jesus is quoting from Psalm 82-6 and we aren't sure in Psalm 82-6 if the psalmist is referring to Jewish leaders or if he's referring to rulers from the time.

So just other general rulers.

So when Jesus says here in, he's quoting that scripture in John, I say you are God's.

Again, we're not sure if it was the Jewish leaders or other rulers from the time, but anyways they get little G gods in there.

Okay.

Pause.

Resume.

Jesus replied, it is written in your own scriptures that God said to certain leaders of the people, I say you are God's and you know that the scriptures cannot be altered.

So if those people who received God's message were called God's, why do you call it blasphemy when I say I am the son of God?

After all, the Father set me apart and sent me into the world.

Don't believe me unless I carry out my Father's work.

But if I do his work, believe me or believe in the evidence of the miraculous works I have done.

Even if you don't believe me, then you will know and understand that the Father is in me and I am in the Father.

So essentially, Jesus is saying, you are saying I blaspheme.

I have told you that I am from God and my works back it up.

If you do not like that I say I am from God, that is on you, not me.

I am from God set apart by God to do his work.

Even if you don't understand or are unwilling to understand, I am who I am.

Essentially what Jesus is saying.

Then he drops the mic. 39.

Again, they sought to arrest him, but he escaped from their hands.

Why did they not understand?

Jesus already told them.

They're not a sheep.

You're not my sheep.

You're not going to understand.

You do not have ears to hear. 40.

Why do sometimes people believe God, not believe in God?

They do not have ears to hear.

They are not his sheep.

Verse 40.

He went away again across the Jordan to the place where John had been baptizing at first.

And there he remained.

And many came to him and they said, John did no sign, but everything that John said about this man was true.

And many believed in him there.

John did no sign, it says, but everything that John said about this man was true.

This is important because one, it legitimizes John the Baptist as a prophet.

Everything that he said about Jesus was true.

The prophecy fulfilled.

Check.

That confirms John the Baptist as a prophet.

Behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.

Boom, there he is.

Here it is again later.

We have others confirming everything that he said about this man is true.

There you go.

Second, we see here again, the whole purpose of the gospel of John.

Many believed in Jesus there.

Many believed in Jesus there.

As we close, I want to bring our attention back to Jesus' words in verses 27 through 30.

My sheep hear my voice, and I know them and they follow me.

I give them eternal life, and they will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.

My Father who has given them to me is greater than all, and no one is able to take them away.

My Father who has given them to me is greater than all, and no one is able to snatch them out of the Father's hand.

I and the Father are one.

Are you a discouraged sheep?

Are you a doubting sheep?

Are you an anxious sheep?

Maybe you're just a sheep that needs a reminder.

What do we do?

What do we do about it?

We should do what his sheep do.

They hear his voice.

What does that mean for us?

We turn to his word and believe his works.

We turn to his word and believe his works.

You might be doubting or having a hard time hearing the shepherd, but you can look back at your life and see his faithfulness.

You can look back in the scriptures and see the faithfulness of God.

His sheep hear his voice, and he has given us his written word to hear him.

Are you using the tool that he's given us?

Are you using the treasure of his word that he's given us?

If you want to hear his voice, open his word.

Sometimes we make this like mystical thing like, oh, I just need a really great moment in worship, and then I'll hear God's voice.

Uh, what?

You have his word.

You don't.

It's not rocket science, and yet we make it out to be this like crazy thing.

We talked about it this morning with the kids.

The Israelites were there.

They were standing at the at the base of the mountain.

If they really wanted to, I'm sure they could still hear the voice of God from the mountain, because it says that they heard the Ten Commandments.

So did the volume, did God turn down the volume of his voice or did or did they just tune it out?

And then they were wanting truth.

They were wanting to hear from God.

And what do they do?

They do what they had done for the last, however many years.

They did what their ancestors did.

They were in slavery in Egypt for 400 years.

And the Egyptians had many gods.

The Egyptians were, were obviously not following Yahweh.

And so what do they do?

They made for themselves an idol.

They carved up an idol instead of tuning in and leaning into the voice of God speaking on the mountain.

Praise God, we do not have to go to a specific mountain to get the voice of God.

We can just turn to the scripture and we can just turn to the Bible and we can just turn to the God of God.

We can just turn to the scripture, which is either written in a book or a couple taps and clicks away from being on your phone.

We are so spoiled with the word of God that we turn to other things to hear his voice.

You don't need secondary or third sources to hear his voice.

You can go to the source.

What do his sheep do?

They hear his voice.

What else do his sheep do?

He knows them.

What does that mean for us?

It means we pray.

John Piper, who's a prominent pastor and teacher, he said it this way, where the mind is not brimming with scripture, the heart is seldom brimming with prayer.

Where the mind is not brimming with scripture, the heart is seldom brimming with prayer.

Jesus knows us.

That side of the equation, if you will, is done.

But the way for us to continue to grow and know Jesus is through his word and through time with him in prayer.

That's why I love that prayer framework that I shared with you on Wednesday.

I even did it this morning while we were in our prayer this morning, working through the reverence, response, requests, and readiness.

We're starting prayer with the word of God, letting scripture, letting Jesus, let the God set the table for our conversation.

What do his sheep do?

They hear his voice.

He knows them and they follow me.

Obedience.

We must follow Jesus to follow Jesus.

Obedience to follow Jesus.

Obedience to follow Jesus.

We must follow Jesus to follow Jesus.

It seems silly.

But you cannot follow Jesus if you do not follow Jesus.

And if you don't know what he says, then are you following him?

How do you follow him if you do not know what he says, what he commands?

And this is not about earning salvation or earning more crowns and jewels in heaven.

This is about following him.

His sheep follow him.

He tells us that time and time again that his sheep follow him, that his disciples take up their cross and follow him.

What do his sheep do?

They hear his voice.

He knows them.

Are known by him and follow him.

And what does the shepherd do?

The shepherd gives us eternal life.

Why?

Because the shepherd is eternal.

We will never perish.

Why?

Because the shepherd never perishes.

And we will not be snatched from his hand.

We will not be snatched from his hand.

We will not be snatched from his hand.

And we will not be snatched from his hand.

Because nothing can snatch him.

He is unsnatchable.

He is untakeable.

There's nothing just like Jesus when he's tempted by Satan.

Nothing could sway Jesus from the father.

One, because they are one.

But also, because he knows that everything is already his.

And so he could not be taken.

He cannot be snatched.

He cannot be taken.

And so if you are in his hands, nothing can take you.

You will not be snatched from his hand.

He is with you.

He is protecting you.

He is leading you.

And he is guiding you.

Why?

Because he is your good shepherd.

Let me pray for us.

Father, we thank you for who you are.

We thank you that you are eternal.

We thank you that you never perish.

We thank you that you are untakeable.

That nothing can sway you or take you.

And since we are in your hand, nothing can take us from your hand.

We thank you for that promise.

We thank you for that assurance from scripture.

From your son's own lips.

And so father, for those of us who are discouraged, doubting, or anxious, or just simply need the reminder that you got us.

You have us.

That song that we've been singing from us since we were kids.

You've got the whole world in your hands.

Father, we thank you that that is true.

That you have us.

Father, we thank you for your word so we can hear your voice.

We thank you that you know us and we thank you that we get to know you.

We thank you that you are leading us and that we get to follow you.

Father, you are so good to us.

You are so kind and gracious to us.

May we continue to remember that we are your sheep.

That you love us and you care for us.

May we hear your voice.

Give us yours to hear, father.

It's in Jesus name.

Amen.
