---
layout: sermon
title: "John 7:1-31"
date: "2025-01-12T14:15:02.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/96988077/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-0-13%2F392995460-44100-2-530c202458701.m4a"
duration: "36:15"
scripture: "John 7:1-31"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: "<p>Church updates & Jesus at the Feast of Booths</p><p><br></p><p>Timestamps:</p><p>0:00 Church updates</p><p>13:05 Sermon starts</p>"
guid: 8c01908a-f9f3-4631-b954-2b072bdb1681
episode_id: c5e606f8
---

<p>Church updates & Jesus at the Feast of Booths</p><p><br></p><p>Timestamps:</p><p>0:00 Church updates</p><p>13:05 Sermon starts</p>

## Transcription

Before we jump into the message this morning, I wanted to announce some kind of new things or changes, sort of, for us in this new year as a church, and before we do that I wanted to go back and sort of give some vision for just kind of even why we gather and do what we do, and Acts 2.42 says they devoted themselves, this is the early church, devoted themselves to the apostles' teaching, fellowship, breaking of bread, and to prayer.

And that's kind of how, why we format our Sundays in the way that we do.

And now, kind of, as we shift into the new year, some, there's two things I'm going to hit on.

Changes to the midweek, and then we're going to go back.

And then some, I guess, I wanted to keep it with the C's because that's the pastoral thing to do.

Changes to the midweek, and then challenges for Sunday.

So, cool.

Doesn't matter.

Changes to the midweek.

We kind of did this with a little bit last year, but wanted to really make it, I guess, a formal invitation, if you will.

We're going to do, we're going to start doing dinner parties, and these will happen once a month on Wednesday nights.

And kind of what we did for Friendsgiving, it won't always be potluck style.

But the whole idea is that these are open to the church, not just to those who are in the Wednesday night group, but opportunities for all of us to gather outside of a Sunday and just create opportunities for fellowship.

And in my life, I feel like there's no greater fellowship other than around a meal, getting to know each other, talking, laughing, all those things.

And so, we'll be doing dinner parties once a month on Wednesday nights.

And the real goal behind that is for us as a community to gather, but also that you would feel equipped to then host one of these for your neighbors, or if you have friends outside of the church, that you would feel equipped to be able to host one of those and do one of those.

We're going to do the first couple of these at the Reader Esparzas, but I imagine throughout the year we can do it at other people's houses and different things like that.

And so, we'll start doing dinner parties once a month.

And then also on Wednesday nights, which again will be open to the whole church, not just those of us who gather on Wednesday nights, but will be worship and prayer gatherings.

Again, to go back to the verse, they devoted themselves to the apostles' teaching, to the fellowship, breaking of bread, and to prayer.

And really, when we, I mean, when we first started gathering as a church, it was, we took prayer requests and all those things.

And then very quickly after, it sort of turned into my cousin's nephew's dog, you know, which nothing against dogs.

Just thought that was a little fresh on the nose.

Anyways, it wasn't my cousin's nephew's dog.

Yeah, that's to be debated.

But we do want to create a space and an opportunity for us to be praying together as a church and worshiping together as a community.

Not really 100% sure on all those details yet, but those will also be happening once a month.

And I actually want to take some time.

So if you could pull out your phone and open up Slack.

And the goal really is to make Slack like the one-stop shop for church members.

And so if you have your phone, there is a, and open up Slack.

There is a channel on Slack called Midweek.

And so you might need to add channel.

And if it's not showing up there.

So if you're on your phone, we're not in Sunday right now, boys.

Um, so, uh, if, if you're there and you can't see Midweek, hit that add channel button.

And then there should be another button that says browse channels and look for Midweek and then add yourself to that channel.

So then on Midweek, uh, it's a little complicated on the, uh, wet on the mobile app.

So I just put it in the description there.

You can hit that link and, uh, it will take you to the calendar.

Um, that's in Midweek.

Um, you can also, and, uh, they're on the Midweek in Midweek.

You see dates.

Are you there?

Are you there at the date?

Okay.

Yep.

And you'll see what's happening and details.

Uh, so, uh, we will start group Wednesday, January 22nd.

And that'll just be typical group for those who meet on Wednesday nights.

Um, at the art, at the Reader Esparza's.

Um, and then we will have our first dinner party Wednesday, uh, I almost said December, February 5th.

And then our prayer and worship gathering will fall on the 26th.

Um, and details will be there, uh, if, if needed.

And, um, that will be the place where if you're looking like, hey, I don't know what's happening this week, or you're looking at the month in advance, um, it'll be right there.

Um, so, it's, it's, it's, yeah, that's, yeah, that's funny.

Hopefully you go back and listen to this, Tim, and you'll see that you're, you're on blast.

Just, I'm going to put him on blast.

Yeah, yeah, why don't you just add him on Sunday and, and add, add that channel.

All right, yep, you know how to use Slack.

So, um, again, dinner parties and, uh, prayer and worship gathering nights, again, are open to everyone.

Um, and that is also including people not members of our church, right?

You can invite someone who's not in our church to a dinner party.

You can, um, obviously give whoever's hosting and on the meal, give the, give that person a heads up so they know to account for, you know, oh, we've got extra people coming.

Um, but also the prayer and worship nights, like, and gatherings, those are also, uh, open invite, right?

Um, not everyone wants to miss a Sunday at their church or, you know, maybe they're not in a church or you're like, yeah, I don't feel like these people are ready for a Sunday gathering.

Um, but you're like, I, I would love to invite them to a dinner party.

That's a great opportunity to invite someone.

Um, which we will be taking communion at a dinner party.

Correct.

Correct.

But if you do invite, but if you do invite someone to a Sunday, you will have to prepare them for that.

Um, which, uh, then going from midweek to Sunday, um, uh, I called all of the male members of the church late last year, talked about giving, um, and thank you to, uh, all of you who, um, either gave above and beyond or whatever you gave, um, we were able to get through the end of the year.

And, uh, so thank you for that.

But one thing I heard sort of kind of repeatedly, there was kind of a, there from multiple people was, uh, either not knowing where the link was to give and, or just forgetting.

Um, and so to help with that, we're going to start praying over our giving once, at least once a month.

Um, and so just a moment for us to gather as a community and thank him for everything that he's given us and, uh, also how we can give back to him.

And, uh, also one of the goals of our church is to be, uh, an extremely generous church.

When we look at the early church, um, they gave property and possessions.

Um, thankfully we haven't had to get to that part, uh, for us as a community.

But, uh, one of our goals of, of, as a church is to be extremely generous.

And we cannot do that without, um, everyone's generosity.

And I actually got a phone call, uh, in December of last year from Hope Resource Center.

And they were just incredibly grateful for our giving and what we gave to them.

And, uh, we're looking for ways, um, we can help with them, not just financially, but, um, serving opportunities as well.

Um, so be on the lookout for that.

Um, or if you're like, I would love to help organize opportunities for us as a church to serve, um, and you're like, I would love to help organize those sorts of things and be all detail oriented and whatnot.

Come and talk to me.

I would, uh, love to empower you to do that.

Um, and so, um, yeah.

Um, then lastly, uh, there, this is, uh, this is a, this is a goal.

That I have for us as a church.

Um, let me give you the why behind it.

And then I'll, I'll tell you what it is.

I think it could be very easy to be comfortable, um, with us as a church and, um, not be looking for people to, whether it be invite to church or be very easy to be comfortable in what we do as a, in a Sunday gathering, or it could be very easy to, um, just sort of get caught up in the routine and in the moment.

And so, um, in response to that, as, uh, as a church, I am challenging us, um, to have a new family every month.

What do I mean by that?

This goal is not so that we would double in size.

Cause if we had a new family every month, we would essentially double in size.

Um, the goal is not that the goal is so that we are looking for people to invite, not just to church, but into our homes.

Because remember, if you're going to invite someone into your home before you invite them to church, does that mean you have to have them exactly into your home?

No, you can go out to eat.

You can have coffee, whatever it is, but the idea behind this goal is not just that we would double in size.

That's not, that is not the heart.

That is not the intention of this goal.

The intention of this goal is that we would be looking for people to add to our community, that you would be looking for people to add to your community.

You would be looking for people to reach out to that might be a neighbor.

That might be a coworker.

That might be, uh, some, somebody you meet wherever out and about the goal is to invite people into not just a Sunday gathering or not just a, a thing, but inviting them into your life, creating opportunities.

There's a couple.

I haven't even told Kayla about this, but I, I just thought about it.

There's a couple in our, in our neighborhood and they walk their dog occasionally.

And, uh, there are people who I've, I've, I've seen multiple times and, uh, I've done the nice Southern, Hey, how you doing?

But I don't know their names.

I don't know their life.

I don't know anything about them, but they're one of the, the, the couples that I'm praying that God would bring them back on their walking route, right?

That they would come, there would be opportunities for me to get to know them, ask their names, those things.

Um, and so the goal again is not to double in size.

If we double in size, amazing that, that doesn't mean that these people have to stick every month, but the goal is that we would be reaching out.

We would be looking for other people to invite into our, our community to invite into your world.

And so, um, that's my spiel.

And now we're very quickly going to turn to John chapter seven verses one through 31.

And I'm somehow going to get this done in 17 minutes.

And in light of that, I'm just going to read the passage and we're going to go, um, to remind us of where we've been.

Uh, remember Jesus said this, uh, in the last, in chapter six, we had Jesus saying, uh, that he is the bread of life and, um, you need to eat his flesh and drink his blood, which again, uh, is believing in that Jesus is the Messiah.

And then chapter seven starts after this, after that conversation, after Jesus talked with these people, he went about in Galilee.

He would not go about in Judea because the Jews were seeking to kill him.

Now the Jews feast of booths was at hand.

So his brothers said to him, leave here and go to Judea that your disciples also may see the works you are doing for no one works in secret.

If he seeks to be known openly, if you do these things, so show yourself to the world for not even his brothers believe in him.

Jesus said to them, my time has not yet come, but your time is always here.

The world cannot hate you, but it hates me because I testify about it.

That its works are evil.

You go up to the feast.

I'm not going to the feast for my time has not fully yet come.

After saying this, he remained in Galilee.

But after his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also went up, not publicly, but in private.

The Jews were looking at him, looking for him at the feast saying, where is he?

And there was much muttering about him among the people.

While some said he is a good man, others said, no, he's leading people astray.

Yet for fear of the Jews, no one spoke openly about him.

About the middle of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple and began teaching.

The Jews therefore marveled saying, how is it that this man has learning when he has never studied?

So Jesus answering them, my teaching is not mine, but his who sent me.

If anyone's will is to do God's will, he will know whether the teaching is from God or whether I'm speaking on my own authority.

The one who speaks on his own authority seeks his own glory, but the one who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true.

And in him, there is no falsehood.

Has not Moses given you the law?

Yet none of you keeps the law.

Why do you seek to kill me?

The crowd answers, you have a demon who is seeking to kill you.

Jesus answered them, I did one work and you marvel at it.

Moses gave you circumcision, not that it is from Moses, but from the fathers.

And you circumcise a man on the Sabbath.

If on the Sabbath, a man receives circumcision, circumcision so that the law of Moses may not be broken.

Are you angry with me?

Because on the Sabbath, I made a man's whole body.

Well, do not judge by appearances, but judge with right judgment.

Some of the people of Jerusalem therefore said, is not this the man whom they seek to kill?

And here he is speaking openly and they say nothing to him.

Can it be that the authorities really know that this is the Christ, but we know where this man comes from.

And when the Christ appears, no one will know where he comes from.

So Jesus proclaimed as he taught in the temple, you know me and you know where I come from, but I have not come on my own accord.

He who sent me is true and him you do not know.

I know him for I come from him and he sent me.

So they were seeking to arrest him, but no one laid a hand on him because his hour had not yet come.

Yet many of the people believed in him.

They said, when the Christ appears, will he do more signs than this man has done?

All right.

So, uh, we start this passage off with, uh, one of the many festivals of Israel and the feast of booths, kind of the main thing about the feast of booze, booze.

Now that's a nice feast.

The feast, the feast of booths or feasts of tabernacles, uh, the sort of main thing was, uh, rest in that you were supposed to withhold from doing ordinary work and present offerings to the Lord.

That was sort of the main thing.

And at it was a time to remember how the Lord brought them out of Egypt.

Okay.

So that was sort of the main thing.

It was also commanded that you were supposed to go to Jerusalem.

Um, and then we have this very interesting conversation with Jesus and his brothers and, uh, sort of the, the key words in this conversation is verse five, right?

For even his brothers, uh, for, for not even his brothers believed in him.

Um, which we don't know why exactly why his brothers did not believe in him.

Um, we could sort of step into speculation, um, now, but I think most of us have siblings and it would be very easy to doubt that your oldest sibling is the Messiah.

Uh, and then think about it right with Jesus.

Every time his birthday comes around, mom gets a little teary eyed.

When she tells the Christmas story, the angel appeared to me and he told me that I was going to be pregnant with the Messiah.

And every, so every, every birthday, right?

Like you hear this story.

It's amazing, but I'm sure the brothers were like, yeah, yeah.

Like whatever it's Jesus, he's our brother.

And so there could be some envy there.

There could be some doubt, or they could be just like every other Jew who was expecting the Messiah to be what they wanted the Messiah to be.

Not who the Messiah was actually supposed to be.

They had a different picture of the Messiah and you certainly have a different picture of the Messiah if the Messiah is your brother.

Um, which is why I think it's so interesting that we have the book of James and, uh, James being the half brother of Jesus.

We don't know if in this context of the story in John chapter seven, if, uh, James is one of the brothers who is sort of kind of egging Jesus on and it's like, you have all these believers.

Like, why would you hide?

Why be in secret?

Right?

We don't know the tone.

I'm adding that tone myself.

Um, but I think it's so cool that even in James one verse one, and of course by this time, the, the time difference between, uh, the time of this conversation in John chapter seven, versus James, Jesus has already died, resurrected and ascended.

And so James with some, uh, with now some, uh, some foresight says James one, one opens like this, James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.

So from, uh, from Jesus's life, death, burial, and resurrection, James clearly had a change of heart.

We, again, we don't know if James is one of the brothers who he was here in John chapter seven, but we could assume if a couple of the brothers had this perspective.

And again, we don't even know, um, we might know how many brothers, it doesn't tell specifically in the, in the text.

Anyways, it's from a different conversation, but James goes, Jesus is not my brother.

I am Jesus's servant.

I am a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.

What an incredible change of heart that we go from a doubting, unbelieving brother to then witnessing the Messiah and saying, that's not my brother.

I'm actually a servant of his incredible change of heart.

Okay, we carry on, uh, verses, uh, 14 through 24 ish.

Um, so Jesus ends up going down to the festival and again, he goes to the festival not to appease his brothers or to give his brothers, uh, more fuel for the fire of their doubt.

But he, he goes in secret because it was a command by God to go to the festival and, and partake and, and be in the festival.

Um, and he finds himself teaching in the temple and, uh, verse 15 says, the Jews therefore marveled saying, how is it that this man has learning when he has never studied?

And, uh, of course, when they say studied, they are referring to the, uh, rabbinical sort of teaching, understudy, disciple, that sort of function, um, where, where a young teen would.

A rabbi would sort of reach out to a young teen and say, follow me, come with me, be a disciple of me, that sort of study.

There, Jesus was not a, an, an understudy of some sort of rabbi.

And so when they are saying, how is this man has learning when he has never studied?

He hasn't studied under a rabbi.

How come this man teaches with so much authority and he teaches so much better than any of the other rabbis we've ever heard?

And so Jesus answers them, my teaching is not mine, but his who sent me.

If anyone's will is to do God's will, he will know whether the teaching is from God or whether I am speaking on my own authority.

The one who speaks on his own authority seeks his own glory, but the one who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true and in him there is no falsehood.

And so we see Jesus is in this room teaching in the temple full of Jews and he tells them, if anyone's will is to do God's will, he will know whether the teaching is from God or from not, or not.

So Jesus knows that apparently that some of the Jews in this room are not truly trying to do the will of God.

He says my, if anyone's will is to do the will of God, he will know whether the teaching is from God or, or if I'm speaking on my own authority.

Essentially going, if you, if you, if you are truly out to seek God's will, you will know I am from God.

And again, this, we can go back to, I believe it was John six where Jesus has this long, uh, uh, message, if you will, discourse, uh, talking about how, uh, the God speaks of his witness, how his works speak of his witness, how the, uh, how, um, the, the, the, the scriptures speak of his witness.

So there was an ability for people to, to see and know that Jesus was from God.

Again, he, he was growing in believers or people who believed in him.

There were people who did not believe in him.

And he's saying, if anyone's will is to do God's will, he will know that my teaching is from God and not my own will.

Uh, it seems that Jesus is kind of digging at their motives and then Jesus reveals his own motives, right?

It, it, it is not for his glory, for Jesus's glory, but for the glory of the father.

Verse 19, has not Moses given you the law yet?

None of you keeps the law.

Why do you seek to kill me?

The crowd answered, you have a demon.

Who is seeking to kill you?

The crowd's like, what are you saying, dude?

Like why?

Like, we're not trying to kill you right now.

Like, what are you talking about?

Uh, who is seeking to kill you?

Then Jesus answered their question.

I did one work and you marvel at it.

Moses gave you circumcision.

Not that it is from Moses, but it's from the fathers.

It's from Abraham, Isaac, Jacob came down that line.

And you circumcise a man on the Sabbath.

If on the Sabbath, a man receives circumcision so that the law of Moses may not be broken.

Are you angry with me because on the Sabbath, I made a man's whole body well?

Do not judge by appearances, but judge with right judgment.

Now, Jesus is really getting to the root of the issue.

Last time Jesus was in Jerusalem, he healed the man at the pool in Bethsaida.

That's John chapter five.

And then he had an argument there with the Jewish leaders.

And this is the healing that he references, right?

Uh, on the Sabbath, I made a man's body, a man's whole body well.

That's what Jesus is referencing.

And, um, then we sort of see this, Jesus is sort of putting himself and this healing of the man at the pool versus sort of Moses and circumcision.

This is kind of the, uh, the battle, the comparison, the compare and contrast that we see here.

Um, and Moses brought the law and he also put into law that circumcision was supposed to happen eight days after birth.

We get that in Leviticus 12 verse three.

And even if it fell on the Sabbath, you were supposed to circumcise.

That was the, the law.

And if the law of Moses required that a man's wellness be given to them, even on the Sabbath, then how could they object to Jesus making a whole man's body well?

How could they object Jesus comparing these two things going like, Hey, like, cool.

You got the little snip snip, but I've got like, I, I literally just made a lame man walk.

How, how, how, how are you not understanding and seeing that I am not just, uh, right, but I am even greater than Moses.

Jesus is comparing these two things and he's like, essentially saying, I am not in error with the law.

You are, you are wrong for thinking that, that I cannot do this on the Sabbath when I am, I am greater than the Sabbath.

Some of the people of Jerusalem therefore said, is this, is not this the man who they are seeking to kill?

What a funny little comparison.

First, they're like, no one's going to kill you.

And then he comes for him and says like, you're wrong.

And they're like, actually, I think this is the guy they are trying to kill.

And then they say, and yet here he is speaking openly and they say nothing to him.

Can it be that the authorities really know that this is the Christ?

And now we've come into a conspiracy theory land, right?

The Jews are like, I thought they were trying to kill this guy.

And here they are, here he is speaking openly.

Do they know something about him that they're not telling us, right?

Do they know something about, let's not open that can of worms.

The Jewish leaders in action caused the people to think, what are they hiding from us?

Do they know he's the Messiah and they aren't telling us?

And then they start to think about where Jesus comes from, his origin.

Verse 27, but we know where this man comes from.

And when the Christ appears, no one will know where he comes from.

Which that statement is actually entirely false.

Because there were Old Testament texts that say where the Messiah is supposed to come from.

Micah 5.2 says that the Savior will be from Bethlehem.

Then Hosea 11.1 says that the Savior will come out of Egypt.

Which Joseph, Mary, and Jesus fled Bethlehem to Egypt with King Herod trying to kill all the babies.

They fled to Egypt.

And then the Messiah comes out of Egypt.

Then Isaiah 9.1-2 says that Galilee will be, that a Savior will come from Galilee.

And so Jesus checks off all these things.

But even then, Jesus goes, You know me, verse 28, and you know where I come from.

But I have not come on my own accord.

He who sent me is true.

And him you do not know. 29.

I know him, for I come from him, and he sent me. 30.

They were seeking to arrest him, but no one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come.

Yet many of the people believed in him.

They said, When the Christ appears, will he do more signs than this man has done?

So, essentially, Jesus in response to these people saying, We know where Jesus comes from.

Like, we won't be able to know where the Messiah comes from.

And Jesus in response to these people says, Yes, Bethlehem and Galilee are not my earthly origins, but they are not my true origin.

I came from the Father.

And I know the Father.

You don't know the Father.

That's what Jesus says to them.

I come from him, and he sent me.

So, here to close.

Jesus did not come just to teach and just to heal.

Did he do those things?

Yes.

Did he do them extremely well?

Did he heal incredibly well?

Yes.

But Jesus came from the Father to fulfill the promises of God for a Savior and Redeemer.

That is Jesus' true purpose.

His true mission was not just to teach, although, thank God, that he did, and we have recordings of it.

He came to heal.

Yes, amazing.

Because he is the ultimate healer.

But Jesus came from the Father to fulfill the promises of God.

So, the question is, how do you see Jesus?

It's so easy these days to simply look at Jesus like a great teacher, to simply look at Jesus like a great moral philosopher, to look at Jesus like someone who has completely revolutionized this modern and enlightened world.

But if we view Jesus like a great teacher, but if we view Jesus just like that, then we miss the entire point.

Jesus is a great teacher, but he is more than that.

He is the Savior.

He is the Redeemer.

He is the Son of God.

He is the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.

And we must put him in his proper place.

We must put Jesus in his proper place, or he will do it for us.

That's all I've got.

Let me pray for us as we close.

Jesus, we thank you for who you are.

We thank you for your words, that they are true.

We thank you.

God, that you came, Jesus, that you came from the Father, and that you fulfilled what man could not.

You did what man could not.

And so, Father, we know you were a great teacher.

Jesus, we know you were a great leader, a great healer.

But you are so much more than that.

And we are sorry for the times that we've come to you, just asking for healing.

We're sorry for the times that we've come to you, just looking for you to step into a situation.

And we have not honored you as Lord and Savior, who is sitting at the right hand of God.

Jesus, who created even a way for us to get to the Father.

We worship you for who you are, not just for what you've done.

Although what you have done is amazing, and we are incredibly grateful for it.

We worship you, Jesus, because you are our Savior, our Redeemer.

Father, we worship you, God, because you are who you are.

You are the creator of everyone and everything.

And we worship you, because we are your creation.

And we thank you.

And it's in your name.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.

Amen.
