---
layout: "sermon"
title: "Acts 8"
date: "2025-12-14T19:00:38.000Z"
category: "sermon"
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/112623169/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-11-14%2F414369997-44100-2-94118b9b68943.m4a"
duration: "31:35"
scripture: "Acts 8"
series: "Acts"
pastor: "Pastor Nate Ellis"
description: "<p>In this sermon we cover all of the eighth chapter in the book of Acts. We focus in on the persecution and scattering of the early church, as well as cover Philip’s travels and interactions with Simon the Magician and the Ethiopian eunuch. </p>\n"
guid: "6c13d4e1-c047-451d-9705-a9a3497ec165"
episode_id: "b60ca7b5"
---

## Transcription

This morning we're in Acts chapter 8, and we'll cover the whole chapter.

Next Sunday will be kind of a Christmas Sunday for us.

At least we'll be celebrating the Christmas season.

Every Sunday is a Christmas Sunday for us.

But we'll take a look at the kind of the story of Jesus‐s birth, and the kids have a song they'll be singing for us and all those fun things, and we'll take a break just one week in Acts, and so we'll talk about the Christmas story a little bit next week, and so that should be fun.

But for this week, we are in Acts chapter 8.

And before we jump into Acts chapter 8, let's just remember Acts chapter 7, the very end.

Stephen is martyred, and we also see this guy Saul introduced.

They laid their cloaks at Saul's feet.

And then if we turn to Acts chapter 8, we will see in verse 1, Saul approved of his execution.

And we're not going to dive into Saul too much this morning.

We'll save that for Acts chapter 9.

But this morning, as we do look at Saul, I want us to look at his actions, not so much the character yet of Saul, which if you can separate a character from his actions, can you really?

At any rate.

Okay, verses 1 through 3.

So we see Saul here, of course, will later, of course, turn into Paul.

But he approves of the execution of Stephen, and on that day, a great persecution arose against the church.

And when we talk about persecution, when the text is talking about persecution here, this isn't just like a one-time event.

This is like continual, perpetual harassment and oppression.

And we get an example of that in verse 3.

As it says, Saul goes from house to house, dragging these people out of their house and taking them to prison.

And so what do the believers do in response to this?

They go like, man, let's get out of here.

They scatter, right?

And I don't blame them.

They're like, hey, y'all can stay.

We're going to take this party down the street.

And so they do that.

And I just wonder how much harder it would have been for these people to just kind of get up and scatter and go elsewhere if they hadn't sold their homes, properties, and possessions like we saw earlier in the book of Acts.

And it's almost as if God has a plan.

Of course, I'm saying that sarcastically.

Of course God has a plan.

And the same goes for you and me.

We might wonder or think like, man, like why is life so rough right now?

Why are things so hard right now?

And the message I want to give to you today is not to give up and not to back down when hard things come.

It can be very easy to slip into our own thought processes, our own ways of thinking, doing, reacting.

But as Christians, if you are a Christian, then you must not do what seems natural to you.

But we must seek the scriptures, seek to obey the scriptures, seek to look for wisdom within the scriptures and see how we ought to respond in the midst of persecution, in the midst of oppression, in the midst of harassment, in the midst of hard, troubling times.

It's so much easier for us to try to fix and solve the problem ourselves, but that's not healthy because we got ourselves into the problem that we're in most likely, sometimes, not always, not exclusively, most of the time.

And so we must continue to believe, continue to trust that God is in control because He is.

He has a plan even when we can't see it.

So the believers scatter.

Why?

Well, because the gospel has to advance.

That's what God called them to do.

That's what Jesus told them to do.

Let me remind you of the anchor verse of the book of Acts, Acts 1-8.

But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you, and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem.

Where were they?

Jerusalem, Judea, Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.

So have the gospel yet advanced outside of Jerusalem yet?

Kind of, sort of, but not really.

And so now we see God giving them a nudge outward through this hardship, through persecution, through these hard things.

Which leads us to the next section of verses, verse 4-8.

Now those who were scattered went about preaching the word, and Philip went down to the city of Samaria and proclaimed to them the Christ.

And the crowds, with one accord, paid attention to what was being said by Philip.

And when they had heard him and saw the signs that he did, for unclean spirits, crying out with a loud voice, came out of many who had them.

And many who were paralyzed or lame were healed.

So there was much joy in that city.

First question is, who is Philip?

Philip is one of the seven that the apostles had laid hands on.

You can just flip back a couple chapters and see Philip is in that list of names with Stephen and Timon and Pumbaa.

And so he was one of those seven that the apostles had laid hands on to serve tables.

And just like Stephen was.

So we, last week, last chapter, I guess last couple chapters, we see Stephen is kind of highlighted.

And then the next one of these seven who is highlighted is Philip.

And Philip is preaching and proclaiming Christ as well, as well as performing signs.

And from there, there was great joy in the city.

It's what the text tells us.

Let's continue.

Verse 9.

But there was a man named Simon who had previously practiced magic in the city and amazed the people of Samaria, saying that he himself was somebody great.

They all paid attention to him from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the power of God that is called great.

And they paid attention to him because for a long time he had amazed them with his magic.

But when they believed Philip, as he preached good news about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.

Even Simon himself believed.

After being baptized, he continued with Philip.

And seeing signs and great miracles performed, he was amazed.

So now we get introduced to this guy Simon.

And he's a magician, right?

And this guy Simon, he had somewhat of a complex.

We could clearly see in the text him calling himself this man of the power of God that is called great.

That's what we see in verse 10 there.

So this guy, he felt like he was some sort of local celebrity.

And because he could do some sort of magic and the people were amazed and they really enjoyed him.

And the text doesn't give us or tell us what kind of magic this was, what kind of things he was doing.

But his magic was compared to nothing when Philip came to town proclaiming the gospel and healing and performing signs from the mighty works of God.

So Philip is preaching and many believe the good news about the kingdom of God and they were even baptized.

And even Simon was, I'm sorry, even Simon, this magician was amazed.

Now, when the apostles at Jerusalem, verse 14, heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent them to Peter and John, who came down and prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit.

For he had not yet fallen on any of them, but they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.

Then they laid their hands on them and received the Holy Spirit.

Okay, this is very, very interesting, very kind of different text we see here, right?

Because it told us just in the section of verses before that they believed and were baptized.

And now it tells us in the text that they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.

So, uh, did Philip just like forget to bring up the Holy Spirit and his baptism?

Like what's going on here?

And, uh, but first, before we answer that question, I want to take a step back and think about the greater context and the rift between the Jews and the Samaritans because they hated each other.

They had theological differences.

They worshiped on different mountains.

The Samaritans, they only used the first five books of the Old Testament.

Their descendants are from Ephraim and Manasseh, who are Joseph's sons.

And we can look back to John 4 and see the story of the woman at the well and also look in the Gospels to the story of the good Samaritan and how the Israelites just really despised the Samaritans.

And I want us to kind of think of this context because let's think about how the Gospel is now advancing and now the Gospel is coming to these people in Samaria.

And if you were a Jew in Jerusalem and hearing about the, this message of Jesus being proclaimed to the Samaritans, what's your first thought going to be?

It's going to be like, what?

Like the, some, the Samaritans?

Like, like, like we, we like can't even like the, some, are you serious?

And so maybe God desired the apostles to come to Samaria to see the Spirit fall upon the Samaritans in order for them to be, for, in order for there to be a connection between the Christians in Jerusalem and the, and the Christians in Samaria.

Christ is building a bigger and greater and better church.

And here is this first representation of bigger and greater in the early church.

And I don't know, maybe the apostles on their journey to Samaria were reminded or thinking of the time when they went to Samaria with Jesus.

And Jesus has this conversation with this woman at the well.

And Jesus says to her, but the hour is coming and is now here when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and in truth.

For the Father is seeking such people to worship him.

God is spirit and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.

Luke very clearly does not give us an explanation as to why the Holy Spirit had not fallen on these believers.

Why it was not given to them at baptism.

But I think the reasoning that I just explained made the most sense to me.

That's why I spent the last few minutes explaining it to you because I thought it was actually, it was a pretty convincing argument.

But the text also tells us of another person who doesn't quite get it yet.

And so let's turn to verse 18.

Now when Simon saw that the Spirit was given through the laying on of hands, he offered them money, saying, Give me this power also, so that anyone on whom I lay my hands may receive the Holy Spirit.

But Peter said to him, May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could obtain the gift of God with money.

You have neither part nor lot in this matter, for your heart is not right before God.

Repent, therefore, of this wickedness of yours, and pray to the Lord that if possible the intent of your heart may be forgiven you.

For I see that you are in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity.

And Simon answered, Pray for me to the Lord, that nothing of what you have said may come upon me.

Now when they had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, they returned to Jerusalem, preaching the gospel to many villages of the Samaritans.

So, Simon, the magician, it would have been very common practice back then for magicians to pay off another magician for them to show them a trick.

They were sharing insider secrets and growing their magician business.

And so Simon does that here with the apostles, and then he's rebuked pretty strongly by Peter.

And this is a good time for us to kind of look at ourselves and ask the question, where in my life or in my faith has my heart not been right before God?

Where have I maybe done something or acted in one way or another, not for God, but so I can make myself look better or be recognized?

Where have I wanted to look smarter or seem better than other Christians because I can do X, Y, or Z?

We all want to look better, seem better than we really are.

It's just human nature.

And if a moment or a thing popped into your head, I would encourage you to take Peter's words to heart here where he says, Repent, therefore, of this wickedness of yours, and pray to the Lord that if possible the intent of your heart may be forgiven you.

For I see that you are in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity.

Another translation for that verse 23, it says, For I see that you are full of poison and captive to unrighteousness.

Peter is speaking to this man's attitude to buy off the Spirit.

He might have been saved and baptized, but there was still wickedness and poison in his heart.

And isn't that the truth for all of us?

Yes, I am a sinner saved by grace, but I need to repent of my wickedness and my unrighteousness.

Let's jump into this final story in Acts chapter 8 where it says in verse 26, Now an angel of the Lord said to Philip, Rise and go toward the south to the road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza.

This is a desert place.

And he rose and went, and there was an Ethiopian, a eunuch, a court official of Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who was in charge of all her treasure.

He had come to Jerusalem to worship and was returning, seated in his chariot, and he was reading the prophet Isaiah.

And the Spirit said to Philip, Go over and join this chariot.

So Philip ran to him and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet and asked, Do you understand what you are reading?

And he said, How can I unless someone guides me?

And he invited Philip to come up and sit with him.

So an angel of the Lord tells Philip to go to this place.

And then, of course, he meets up with this Ethiopian eunuch, who was a court official of the queen of Ethiopia.

And he's in this chariot and reading the book of Isaiah.

The text also tells us he was going to Jerusalem to worship, So we cannot say for certain of what his status was.

There's all sorts of temple laws around eunuchs and where he could and could not go if he's part of the diaspora or if he's just kind of studying Judaism.

We don't need to get into all those details.

But anyways, he has this scroll of Isaiah.

And having a scroll, of course, he probably started at the beginning and he found himself here at these verses in Isaiah 53.

And Philip meets him and he hears him reading aloud and says, Do you understand what you are reading?

Which, I'm totally stealing this line.

Because, I don't know about you, but sometimes I see people in coffee shops or wherever and they've got their Bibles out and I want to go up and talk to them.

But I'm like, ah, is that kind of weird?

But if I just ask, like, hey, well, what are you reading there?

Do you understand what you're reading?

I love it.

So this man is reading in Isaiah.

And he's in chapter 53.

And he invites Philip to come and sit with him.

And verse 32 tells us, Now the passage of Scripture that he was reading was this.

Like a sheep he was led to the slaughter, and like a lamb before a cheer is silent, so he opens not his mouth.

In his humiliation, justice was denied him.

Who can describe his generation?

For his life is taken away from the earth.

Verse 34.

And the eunuch said to Philip, About whom, I ask you, does the prophet say this about himself or about someone else?

Then Philip opened his mouth and beginning with the Scripture, he told him the good news about Jesus.

So Philip goes on to tell this man that this text is speaking about Jesus.

And of course, we read that, we see that, and we're like, yeah, we see Jesus all over this passage.

And the text doesn't tell us here, but we could probably assume, just like Peter on the day of Pentecost, Philip must have told this man to repent, believe, and be baptized, since the next part of verses tells us in verse 36, And as they were going along the road, they came to some water, and the eunuch said, See, here is water.

What prevents me from being baptized?

And he commanded the chariot to stop, and they both went down into the water, Philip the eunuch, and he baptized him.

If you don't see it in your text, or if you didn't notice, verse 37 is missing.

That's because in, depending on which translation, like in, I know it's in the King James, verse 37, it essentially walks through the path of, oh, you need to repent and be baptized.

And so he, and believe.

And so the man believed, and was, and then we get verse 38, and so then they go down and baptize him.

But that's not found in the earliest manuscripts.

Why am I telling you this right now?

At any rate, it didn't make the cut for the ESV.

Because it's not in the earliest manuscripts.

And if you read verse 37, you could see it's like, yeah, they added that.

He believed, and he was ready to be baptized.

Great.

Verse 39.

And when he came up out of the water, the spirit of the Lord carried Philip away, and the eunuch saw him no more, and went on his way rejoicing.

But Philip found himself at Azotus, and as he passed through, he preached the gospel to all the towns until he came to Caesarea.

So Philip is taken away from the scene after he baptizes this Ethiopian eunuch.

And however Philip left the scene, if a hoverboard came and took him, or whatever the scene was, this Ethiopian man, he couldn't care less.

He was rejoicing.

The gospel had, he saw the light.

He stepped into the light, and he was rejoicing.

Amazing.

Philip was on his way.

Answered his question.

So Philip goes to Caesarea, and the gospel, we see the gospel, it's advancing, it's moving out beyond Jerusalem, Judea, and Samaria.

And in Acts 21, we'll actually see mentioned yet again, Philip, and he makes his home in Caesarea, and he is continuing to spread the gospel and the good news in Caesarea.

But as we close this morning, I've kind of sprinkled some application throughout.

The very top, as we're talking and looking at the persecution of the early church, and seeing how we ought to persevere through hard times, stay obedient to the Lord, just like these early disciples did not back down from the persecution.

Also ask the question, where in my life or in your faith has your heart not been right before God?

Seeing Simon, the magician, having a wrong idea of the power and presence of God and how we might not be trying to buy the power of God or like Simon did, or you're probably not watching a televangelist and trying to buy some holy water.

At least I hope not, but that might not be us exactly, but we might have a wrong expectation of how God should treat us or act towards us.

Or maybe we try to persuade others to thinking something about us or making ourselves look better than we actually are, more than we actually are.

And may we repent of our wickedness and poisonous hearts, but in our last few minutes this morning, I want us to, I want to make one final point and I actually want us to look back again at Philip with his Ethiopian unit.

In verse 26, it starts and it says, Now an angel of the Lord said to Philip, Rise and go towards the south.

Then verse 27 starts, And he rose and went.

Okay, then if we jump down a couple verses, it says, And the Spirit said to Philip, Go over and join this chariot.

So Philip ran to him.

An angel of the Lord said to Philip, Go and rise toward the south.

And he rose and went.

Oh, go back.

This is embarrassing.

That's the button I was trying to press.

He rose and went.

Then the Spirit said to Philip, Go over and join this chariot.

So Philip ran to him.

When God asks you to do something, is it immediate obedience? obedience?

Is there immediate obedience on your end?

An angel of the Lord said to Philip, Rise and go towards the south.

And he rose and went.

And the Spirit said to Philip, Go over and join this chariot.

So Philip ran to him.

My mom had this saying to us kids as we were growing up and I hated it.

She said, To delay is to disobey.

But I see this in my own kids now.

I ask them to go get ready for bed and then the next thing I know it's a dance party. like Yeah, she was right.

And how quickly did my children forget what their father had asked them to do because they got distracted.

I have found it to be true that when I delay obedience, I get distracted which then leads to disobedience.

I asked this question last week.

What am I afraid to do that I am uncomfortable having not yet done for the glory of God?

What am I afraid to do that I am uncomfortable having not yet done for the glory of God?

And so the question this week is have you done that?

What has God asked you to do?

What is God maybe nudging you towards?

Where in your life is there disobedience that you know needs to be repented of?

And have you done it?

I want to be like Philip.

He ran to that chariot.

What are you afraid to do that you are uncomfortable having not done yet for the glory of God?

And if you haven't done it, then let me remind us of verses 22 and 23 where Peter says, to Simon the magician, repent therefore of this wickedness of yours and pray to the Lord that if possible, the intent of your heart may be forgiven you for a sea that you are full of poison and captive to unrighteousness.

May you and I be children of God who run towards obedience may your heart's true desire be to be an obedient son or daughter to your heavenly father and this is not for shame sake but because you desire to follow in the footsteps of your savior who was obedient to death even death on a cross that is our example that is our aim that is our guide how often do we look to the left or the right to the people around us to compare ourselves to make ourselves feel better like we're oh I'm a few steps ahead of that person at least I ain't got that going on when our peers are not our example now us as Christians we should model we should be a godly example but our example is Jesus Christ may the Lord find you obedient to him not for shame sake not even for salvation sake but because he's called us and since he's called us since we are secure in the palm of his hand are we to go on sinning of course not we must repent confess may the Lord find us faithful would you pray with me Jesus we thank you for your word the advancement of your gospel if it weren't for that we would not be here today spirit would you show us where we need to be obedient and following you we know we are sinners we know we fall short but we want to honor you with our lives we desire to in view of God's mercy offer ourselves as a living sacrifice and that is holy and pleasing unto you and we cannot do that without your grace and power so enable us Holy Spirit in Jesus name I pray amen amen and amen pray you have a good rest of your week and we'll see you next Sunday and get ready to celebrate this Christmas season see ya pause
