---
layout: sermon
title: John 19:1-16
date: 2025-08-10T12:52:47.000Z
category: sermon
audio_url: https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/106717854/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-7-11%2F405471015-44100-2-c944170e7e315.m4a
duration: 28:44
scripture: John 19:1-16
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: "Jesus’ final trial with Pilate."
guid: 340e9e52-40df-40f7-bf1c-5fd1f4273fde
episode_id: 54adf0c5
transcription_model: whisper-large-v3-turbo
---


## Transcription

Thank you.

Let's jump back up to verse 1 here where it says, "...then Pilate took Jesus and flogged Him." So flogging in Roman times, it could take three different forms.

Think of it almost as like easy, medium, hard, or light, medium, heavy, or like mild, medium, hot.

Think of it as like a gradually getting more severe sort of flogging or punishment.

The first one, the easy flogging, was not very severe.

It was more so just like a, not part taunting, part like, you get a spanking.

Medium was for more serious criminals and then the worst flogging was reserved for the worst of the worst.

And it usually started with being beaten and would also usually end with crucifixion, this third type of flogging.

And so when they were being beaten, there would have been a whip with leather throngs or leather parts.

And as part of those like leather strips, there's either bone or metal or lead or all types of different metals that were placed into these leather strips and then whipped.

And in again, this third flogging, this worst flogging, the beatings were so savage and so severe that victims sometimes died just as part of these floggings.

There are eyewitness accounts that tell of being able to see bone and seeing like entrails or intestines in the midst of these floggings.

So, pretty severe.

Now, the question is, which one of these did Jesus get?

If we look at this gospel account and also if we look in Luke, John and Luke kind of tell one story and then Matthew and Mark kind of tell another story.

And so either they're getting their story wrong or Jesus got whipped twice, got flogged twice.

And I think there's actually pretty good evidence to say that he was flogged twice.

He got two different types of flogging.

And Luke actually gives us a lot of clarity on this.

Luke 23 says, look, nothing.

This is Pilate speaking to the Jews.

Look, nothing deserving death has been done by him, him being Jesus.

I will therefore punish and release him.

So it's almost like Pilate saying like, I'm going to punish him, then release him.

And then you jump down a few verses, but they all cried out together away with this man released to us Barabbas.

So Pilate says, I will punish and release him.

I'm going to like he's going to have one of these floggings could be the first one could be the second level.

Anyways, he's going to get flogged.

He's going to get beaten at some point.

And then I'm going to release him and then jump down a few verses and all the Jews cry away with this man released to us Barabbas.

So this gives us an understanding that there was an intent from Pilate not to destroy Jesus at some point, at least to the point of death, but to maybe convey some sympathy for the Jews to see him beaten up.

I mean, if we look in our text this morning, verse 12 says, from then on, Pilate sought to release Jesus.

So there was some, at least moment, some time where Pilate was like, nah, like he's innocent.

We don't, he doesn't need to be killed.

But this is not the beating that we see both in Matthew and Mark, where immediately after Jesus is beating, they find someone to carry his own cross because Jesus does not have the strength to do it himself because he has been beaten so severely.

So there's some argument to say, at least some point that's worth mentioning this morning, that potentially, you know, Jesus was beaten twice.

Whether once or twice, he was beaten.

Let's jump into the rest of our scripture.

Verse four, Pilate went out again and said to them, See, I am bringing him out to you, that you may know that I find no guilt in him.

So Jesus came out, wearing the crown of thorns and a purple robe.

Pilate said to them, Behold the man!

When the chief priests and officers saw him, they cried out, Crucify him!

Crucify him!

So, again, Pilate believes that Jesus is not guilty.

He just had the Roman soldiers beat him up.

And Pilate just had the Roman soldiers beat Jesus up.

And Pilate is now presenting Jesus to the Jews and going, Behold the man!

Or in other words, Look at this guy!

Right?

And maybe he's using this language to say like, Look at this guy.

He is merely a man.

Like, what?

You think this guy is going to come and destroy Rome?

Like, look at him.

Like, we've just beat him up.

We've put a crown of thorns in him.

We've mocked him.

This man is not a god.

Look at how humiliated he is.

It's almost as if Pilate is asking the Jews, You think this man is a threat?

Whatever Pilate's intent was, The chief priests and the officers are not pleased.

They have no sympathy, no care.

Crucify him!

They say.

And the crowd has done what Pilate asked.

Pilate said, Behold the man!

And they beheld him.

They looked at him.

And they said, Crucify him.

Instead of seeing him with sympathy, All they wanted was a death sentence.

Verse 6 continues.

Pilate knows they can't crucify him.

Pilate knows they can't, That the Jews cannot kill Jesus.

We discussed this last week.

The Jews even, Themselves, Earlier in chapter 18 said, We don't have the right to kill.

Like, We need you to do the dirty work for us.

And so Pilate is probably here, Flexing his authority, Going like, Nah, nah, nah, nah, nah.

You can't kill him.

And, You go and do it.

He's not guilty to me.

But the Jews answered him, We have a law, And according to that law, He ought to die, Because he has made himself The son of God.

So if we're looking at what the Jews were telling Pilate, Just in this Gospel account of John, This is new information.

They, Up to this point, Between Pilate and the Jews, Jesus is not called the son of God.

But now he is.

They throw that one out.

And, Then Pilate responds, Verse 8, When Pilate heard this statement, He was even more afraid.

So, From our study over the last couple weeks, We've come to see that Pilate, Obviously did not like the Jews.

The Jews did not like, Like Pilate.

There was a mutual disdain.

We also saw that, Pilate was impressionable, To say the least.

Uh, He would bend, To the Jews.

He, He was all about keeping the peace.

And, Uh, If we, And so what was, Pilate even more afraid of?

Was he afraid of the Jews?

Or, Was he afraid that he was actually dealing with a potential God?

Right?

The Romans, They loved their gods.

They had multiple gods.

And so, Maybe upon hearing this, Was, Was he afraid?

Am I actually dealing with a God?

Uh, We also, Need to, Remember, At, At some point, Along this whole process, And along this whole journey, Uh, We see in Matthew 27, Verse 19, While Pilate was sitting on the judgment seat, His wife sent word to him, Have nothing to do with that righteous man, For I have suffered much, Because of him today, In a dream.

So maybe Pilate was afraid, Because in Roman thought, Dreams were often viewed as divine messages, Omens from the gods.

And according to Cicero, A Roman philosopher, Night visions were especially important during judicial decisions.

So at some point along in this process, Uh, Pilate's wife, Has a dream, Gets, Then calls, An assistant, A servant, To send to Pilate, And, What does the, The, This person say, Have nothing to do with that righteous man, For I have suffered much of him, Much because of him, Today, In a dream.

So, Maybe she's, I mean she called Jesus a righteous man, So maybe she's connecting the dots, Like, hey, what's, Like, Maybe this man is from the gods, Maybe there is some sort of, Uh, Like, he is a good man, And maybe he's innocent, And so she's connecting some sort of the dots here.

A quick aside here, I would just say to us today, Let's not pay too much attention, To our dreams.

Okay?

The other night, I had a dream, Where, I was sitting in a church, And, I was with, Morgan Wallen, And we were singing his song, Miami.

And so, First off, Uh, Don't hold your breath for that dream to come to pass.

But secondly, Shows kind of how, Wobbly our dreams might be.

Pilate is afraid.

We don't know why.

Exactly.

We can't say for certain.

But just looking at all the stuff going on, I would probably be afraid too.

Verse 9 continues, He entered into his, He entered his headquarters again, And he said to Jesus, Where are you from?

But Jesus gave him no answer.

So Pilate said to him, You will not speak to me?

Do you not know, That I have authority to release you, And authority to crucify you?

Crucify you.

So Pilate pulls Jesus back into his headquarters, And asks, Where are you from?

To which, John writes, That Jesus gave him no answer.

This is probably a clue, An indication of, Isaiah 53, 7, Where it says, He was oppressed, And he was afflicted, Yet he opened not his mouth, Like a lamb that is led to the slaughter, And like a sheep, That before it shears is silent, So he opened not his mouth.

But Jesus doesn't stay silent.

So maybe Jesus is also like, No, if I answer this question, Correctly, Maybe Pilate will put an end to this.

But, Jesus is like, Let's just get going on with what we need to get going on.

Like, If Pilate really cared about justice, He probably would have done the right thing by now, But political peace was Pilate's name of the game.

That was his guiding light and his star.

And so Pilate is upset, And he says nothing in response to Jesus, And he's like, I can help you.

See, I have the power.

And Jesus now speaks up and says, You would have no authority over me at all, Unless it had been given to you from above.

Therefore, He who delivered me over to you, Has the greater sin.

Jesus tells Pilate, Jesus tells Pilate, Who is really in charge.

And it's almost like Jesus says, All authority in heaven and on earth is given to me from my father.

And yes, Pilate, You do have the authority to free me or to crucify me, But you were destined for this moment to do what you're supposed to do.

And so just do it.

The question also here is, What did Jesus mean when he said, Who delivered me over to you?

Therefore, he who delivered me over to you has the greater sin.

What did Jesus mean by that?

I think Jesus meant that there are degrees or levels of wickedness.

And I think we can understand that just from our very common sense.

There's a difference between a speeding ticket and vehicular manslaughter.

There's a difference there.

Right?

And I think Jesus is saying to Pilate, You have displayed a lack of justice.

You have displayed no justice at all.

In fact, Pilate, But a lesser sin, Right?

Like, Jesus doesn't say Pilate did not sin.

He just says that the Jews have done a greater sin.

And that greater sin is the Jews betraying the blood of their Messiah.

Rejecting their Savior.

Their promised Savior.

Both parties are guilty.

Both parties are in sin.

The Jews just have greater sin.

Verse 12.

From then on, Pilate sought to release Jesus.

But the Jews cried out, If you release this man, you are not Caesar's friend.

Everyone who makes himself a king opposes Caesar.

So when Pilate heard these words, He brought Jesus out and sat down on the judgment seat, A place called the Stone of Pavement and an Aramaic Gavatha.

Now it was the day of preparation of the Passover.

It was about the sixth hour.

So, here we see the Jews are kind of antagonizing and pushing on Pilate's pressure points.

Which is not justice.

Which is not what's right or what's wrong.

But, who's in charge?

If you release this man, you are not Caesar's friend.

You're a Roman governor.

Your boss is Caesar.

And everyone who makes himself a king opposes Caesar.

So, the Jews are saying, If you are on Jesus' side, you're not on Caesar's side.

Then we also get this timeline update from John.

It was the day of preparation of the Passover.

It was about the sixth hour.

It doesn't take too much study on Passover to see that on the preparation of the Passover, at about this time, were when the lambs were to be slaughtered.

And so, John is probably alluding here to all the way back to John chapter 1, where John the Baptist says as Jesus comes out, Behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.

Right?

Passover.

They kill the lamb.

They take the blood of the lamb.

And it covers the doorposts.

This is all the way back in Exodus.

It covers the doorposts.

And the angel of death will pass over the home.

And here on Passover, John makes this connection.

It's the preparation of the Passover.

It's about the sixth hour where the blood of the lambs is about to be slain.

And here is our Passover lamb, the ultimate and final Passover lamb, who is about to be slain.

He said to the Jews, Behold your king.

First he says, Pilate says, Behold the man.

Now he's changed his tone.

Behold your king.

They cried out.

They, the Jews, cried out, Away with him.

Away with him.

Crucify him.

Pilate said to them, Shall I crucify your king?

The chief priests answered, We have no king but Caesar.

So he delivered him over to them to be crucified.

The Jews played their hand in such a way that Pilate has no choice but to crucify Jesus.

Again, there's hundreds of Roman soldiers in town.

Who knows who else is in town of Rome.

Word would probably very quickly get out that Pilate took the side of this man who the Jews said.

Opposing Caesar, all these things.

We have no king but Caesar.

And yet, Pilate is letting this man free?

That would not look good on a governor's resume.

So Pilate had no choice but to crucify Jesus.

And the Jews are poking at Pilate going, You're going to oppose your leader and your king?

You should do what we want.

The Hebrew scriptures here also repeatedly insist that the only true king of Israel is God himself.

Like, let's take note here of what these chief priests, Sadducees and Pharisees, like the leaders of the Jews, of what they're saying here.

They say, we have no king but Caesar.

So not only are they rejecting Jesus, but through their words, they are rejecting Yahweh.

We have no king but Caesar.

They are disowning the kingship of the Lord himself.

These are some strong words from the Jews.

Pilate did what he was predestined to do.

Verse 16, he delivered him being Jesus over to them to be crucified.

Oops, moving too quickly here.

It's a common question for both believers and skeptics to ask, Why do bad things happen to good people?

It's a very common question.

It's like the number one sort of moral question for apologetics is, Why do bad things happen to good people?

And with this story of the crucifixion, we see this displayed.

It's the pinnacle displayment of why do bad things happen to good people.

Right?

Like when we're looking at normal human beings, we must lead with the question, Who is good?

What is good?

If we're talking with someone who's not a believer, Where do you even get your moral standing of what is good?

But we're in a room of believers, so we can set that question to the side for now.

Jesus tells us himself in the scriptures that no one is good but God alone.

And here is God in the flesh, an innocent man being taken to the cross.

An innocent man given a criminal's death.

He was blameless.

He was perfect.

And yet here he is being beaten.

A crown of thorns being punched into his head.

Jesus was good and he was destroyed.

I heard a quote the other day.

A pastor or a priest or someone of the clergy saying, If I had the power of God, I would change a lot of things.

But if I had the wisdom of God, I would leave things as they are.

If I had the power of God, I would change a lot of things.

But if I had the wisdom of God, I would leave things as they are.

A very interesting sort of illustration quote to kind of sum up and think about.

We do not understand the ripple effects of both good and bad decisions.

We do not understand what is happening down the line from both the good and the bad of decisions.

I asked Kayla's permission to share this story, but in her late teens and early twenties, she went through some abuse.

And then when she got saved, she started serving in student ministry.

And one of her high school students that she was leading a small group of comes to her in a very private way.

And starts explaining to her, the student is explaining to Kayla what she just went through.

And it was nearly the exact same thing that Kayla went through.

And it was at that time where Kayla was like, wait a second.

Is God using some horror, some terror, some evil that was done to me?

So that I could be a support and a help to this other teenager who was going through the exact same thing I went through when I was a teenager?

We can look to the scriptures and see the story of Joseph, right?

At the end of his story, after abuse, after human trafficking, after prison and all, what does he say?

This is my prayer phrase.

Joseph says to his brothers, the evil you put me through was God's provision for good.

The abuse from his brothers, the human trafficking from his brothers, the imprisonment that he went through.

He would not have been able to be vice president of Egypt if he would have stayed home with his family.

And now, because of his role, he's able to save his family.

The evil that his brothers put him through was God's provision for good.

So why do bad things happen?

Well, first, we live in a broken world, a fallen and sinful world.

But God can use brokenness and messed up things for good.

And that's exactly what we see with the gospel, with the story of Jesus.

That the evil that Jesus went through was for our good.

That's why we call it Good Friday.

There was nothing good about that day other than the fulfillment of prophecy.

Isaiah 53, 5.

But he was pierced for our transgressions.

He was crushed for our iniquities.

Upon him, upon Jesus, was the chastisement or the punishment that brought us peace.

And with his wounds, we are healed.

By the nails through his wrist and the nails through his heels, we are healed.

We are healed because of Jesus' sacrifice.

Our punishment, he takes so that we can have peace.

And so this morning, we're going to respond by remembering and receiving the Lord's Supper.

His body and blood that were shed and poured out for us.

For the forgiveness of sins and his sacrifice, establishing a new covenant for all who would believe.

Let us partake of these elements in remembrance of Jesus and what he has done for us.

And we pray, we'll receive, and partake of communion.

And then I'll close this in prayer.

Jesus, we thank you that you were pierced for our transgressions.

That you were crushed for our iniquities.

Jesus, that you took the punishment for us.

And you brought us peace.

You've given us peace.

And we thank you that by your wounds, we are healed.

Lord, this morning, as we turn to the table, as we turn to the bread and the cup, we remember your sacrifice.

We remember your body that was broken for us.

Your blood that was shed for us.

So that we could be with you forever.

Help us not to take this, your sacrifice lightly.

Help us to see the torture that you went through.

How you took the cross for us.

Help us to live lives of celebration and praise and worship.

Because of all that you have done for us.

We partake of these in remembrance of you.

And it's in Jesus' name everyone said, Amen.
