---
layout: sermon
title: "John 11:28-44"
date: "2025-03-16T18:17:19.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/99939011/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-2-16%2F396678145-44100-2-04304748c6491.m4a"
duration: "28:11"
scripture: "John 11:28-44"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>Get up, Lazarus. </p>\n
guid: 664b27c7-c4b1-47ff-b5eb-9bd5a8113f32
episode_id: 7db6f0df
---

## Transcription

John chapter 11 this morning.

John chapter 11, starting in verse 28.

John 11, 28 is where we are, where we will begin.

But actually for our reading, let's read all of chapter 11, verse 1 through verse 44.

Chapter 11, 1 through 44.

If somebody wants to read that for us, John 11, 1 through 44, so we can remember where this chapter started, where we left off last week and what is to come this weekend.

John 11, starting verse 1 through 44.

Bueller.

I agree.

Now a certain man was ill, Lazarus of Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister Martha.

It was Mary who anointed the Lord with equipment and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was ill.

So the sister sent to him saying, Lord, he whom you love is ill.

When Jesus heard it, he said, this illness does not lead to death, but as for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified through it.

Now, Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.

So when he heard that Lazarus was ill, he stayed two days longer in the place where he was.

Then after this, he said to the disciples, let us go to Judea again.

The disciples said to him, Rabbi, the Jews were just now seeking to stone you, and are you going there again?

Jesus answered, are there not 12 hours in the day?

If anyone walks in the day, he does not stumble because he sees the light of this world.

But if anyone walks in the night, he stumbles because the light is not in him.

After saying this, he said to them, our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I will go and awaken him.

The disciples said to him, Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will recover.

Now Jesus has spoken of his death, but they thought that he meant taking a rest in sleep.

Then Jesus told them plainly, Lazarus has died, and for your sake, I'm glad that I was not there, so that you may believe.

But let us go to him.

So Thomas called the twin, said to his fellow disciples, let us also go that we may die with him.

Now when Jesus came, he found that Lazarus had already been in the tomb four days.

Bethany was near Jerusalem about two miles off, and many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary to console them concerning their brother.

So when Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went to meet him, but Mary remained seated in the house.

Martha said to Jesus, Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.

But even now, I know that whatever you ask from God, God will give you.

Jesus said to her, your brother will arise again.

Martha said to him, I know that he will rise again on the resurrection on the last day.

Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life of whoever believes in me, though he die, yet shall he live.

And everyone who lives and believes in me will never die.

So do you believe this?

She said to him, yes, Lord, I believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who is coming into the world.

When she had said this, she went and called her sister Mary saying in private, the teacher is here and is calling for you.

And when she heard it, she rose quickly and went to him.

Now, Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was still in the place where Martha had met him.

When the Jews who were there in the house, consoling her, saw Mary rise quickly and go out, they followed her, supposing that she was going to the tomb, tweaked there.

Now, when Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet, saying to him, Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.

When Jesus saw her weeping and the Jews who had come with her also weeping, he was moved in his spirit and greatly troubled.

And he said, where have you laid him?

They said to him, Lord, come and see.

Jesus wept.

So the Jews said, see how he loved him.

But some of them said, could not he who opened the eyes of the blind man also have kept this man from dying?

Then Jesus deeply moved again, came to the tomb.

It was a cave and a stone lay against it.

Jesus said, take away the stone.

Martha, the sister of the dead man, said to him, Lord, by this time there will be an odor for he has been dead for four days.

Jesus said to her, did I not tell you that if you believe, you would see the glory of God?

So they took away the stone and Jesus lifted up his eyes and said, Father, I thank you that you have heard me.

I knew that you always hear me.

But I say on this account of the people standing around that they may believe that you have sent me.

When he had said these things, he cried out with a loud voice, Lazarus, come out.

The man who had died came out.

His hands and feet bound with linen strips, his face wrapped in a cloth.

And Jesus said to them, unbind him and let him go.

Awesome.

Very good.

So where we pick back up from where we left off yesterday, last week, Jesus reveals himself as a resurrection and the life, all right, that's around verse 25-ish, not-ish, it is 25.

And everyone who lives and believes in me shall never die.

Then Jesus asks Martha, do you believe this?

To which she said, yes, Lord.

I believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who is coming into the world.

So she makes his declaration.

And when she had said this, she went and called her sister Mary, saying in private, the teacher is here and is calling for you, 29.

And when she heard it, she rose quickly and went to him.

Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was still in the place where Martha had met him.

When the Jews who were with her in the house, consoling her, saw Mary rise quickly and go out, they followed her, supposing that she was going to the tomb to wait there.

So Martha has this interaction with Jesus.

Jesus asks her, yes, do you, or do I believe?

Yes, she affirms that belief.

And then she goes and finds Mary, pulls Mary aside, then says, Mary, the teacher is here and he's calling for you.

Then there's a posse of Jews that follow along as Mary quickly goes out and leaves their house and goes to see Jesus, which leads to a question, what's up with this posse of Jews?

So with Jewish funerals, it was customary that a family would at least hire a couple of flute players and wailing women to mourn alongside them, to mourn alongside the family.

So the presence of professional mourners, yes, mom, you would do a great job.

That, we know.

So the presence of professional mourners demonstrated the depth of the family sorrow.

So alongside the family and friends, you had these flute players, anyone play the flute?

We can start a side business.

Oh, lovely, awesome.

We got a little side hustle going on with.

And so you would hire these people to show the mourning and grief and sorrow that the family felt.

And even if you were not wealthy to the wealthiest, which we know from chapter 12, which we'll get there, maybe next week we'll see that Martha, Mary and Lazarus, cause again, Mary pours out the perfume, right?

So, and it was very costly.

And so this family was not poor.

They were wealthy.

So there was a, probably a big posse.

They probably hired the best of the best to come and mourn alongside them.

So that's what's up with this posse of Jews.

And of course, the text tells us they thought that Mary was going to the tomb.

She was not going to the tomb, she was going to Jesus.

And so that's why 32.

Now, when Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet saying to him, Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.

Let's take a moment to compare and contrast Mary and Martha not saying once better or worse, but just to compare and contrast, even the way sometimes we approach pain and suffering and grief and loss.

Martha, if we jump back to verse 21, Martha goes out to Jesus before he gets to town.

And Martha said to Jesus, Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.

But even now I know that whatever you ask from God, God will give you.

That's Martha's conversation with Jesus.

Then if we jump down to 32, we see Mary's approach to Jesus.

She falls at his feet saying to him, Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died, period.

So of course, from the verbal standpoint, we see them, both Martha and Mary, almost say the exact same thing word for word as they approach Jesus.

Martha just added in a little more hope, if you will.

But even now I know that whatever you ask from God, God will give you.

Mary, on the other hand, falls at Jesus' feet and says, Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.

So Mary's response seems to be more emotional, maybe a little less hopeful.

But what we can take note of is Jesus' response.

And a question that I kind of wrote out as I was looking at this is, how often do we approach Jesus like Mary?

With, we might not weep and wail and fall at his feet, physically, but internally, emotionally, might have a little more drama, woe is me, right?

A little more disappointment and not hope.

But Jesus' response is not what we would expect.

Verse 33, when Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews who had come with her also weeping, he was deeply moved in his spirit and greatly troubled.

So Jesus' response to Mary's emotional response and the onlookers and the family and friends and the mourners, their response together, Jesus was deeply moved in his spirit and greatly troubled.

Jesus doesn't tell Mary to shut up and stop crying.

Jesus himself was deeply moved and greatly troubled.

Now, this brings up another question.

What is Jesus deeply moved and greatly troubled by?

Is Jesus deeply moved and greatly troubled by the death of Lazarus?

Probably not.

He already said he was going to raise him from the dead.

So that's not something that he's moved by.

Was he moved by the lack of faith of Mary and the Jews?

Potentially.

But what I think really moved Jesus was the effects of sin, which is death.

What greatly moved and deeply troubled Jesus are the effects of sin, which the wages of sin is death.

Jesus was in the presence of a thing he hates the most and the thing that he came to conquer, death.

Death is Jesus' enemy.

Death is the thing that he came to destroy and the thing that he would face head on on the cross in about a week's time.

Death is what had Jesus pissed off.

Our English translation does not do this greatly moved and deeply troubled justice.

Death pisses Jesus off.

It angers Jesus.

Jesus is in anguish.

He is filled with justice and he's filled with righteousness, a righteous indignation.

He is upset.

Like when Jesus goes to the temple and he sees the money changers and the things of that nature, he is angry.

Why?

Because it is not serving its proper purpose.

The temple was not serving its proper purpose and Jesus is here seeing the anguish of the people and his friends and he is seeing the culmination of death in his friend Lazarus and he's angry.

Death was never part of the story and death is the problem that we brought into this world that Jesus came to fix and Jesus is witnessing the effects of sin on all of humanity.

So what does Jesus do?

He asks, where have you laid him?

They said to him, Lord, come and see. 35, Jesus wept.

Jesus is angry.

He wants to go see Lazarus' body because he knows what he's come to this moment to do and Jesus weeps, which leads to another question.

Why did Jesus weep?

Mary had already wept at his feet.

The Jews and the mourners were doing their thing.

So why did Jesus feel like he had to cry as well?

He had to join in on the mourning.

Why?

Paul will later write in Romans 12, rejoice with those who rejoice and weep with those who weep.

Jesus is on the verge of his greatest miracle to date but he had the time and awareness to enter into the feelings of grief and loss for those that he loved.

I have a hard time doing this.

I can struggle at times entering into the feelings of those around me.

I either wanna fix the problem, I'm uncomfortable with the feelings, so I stay silent.

I try to make a joke to make it feel a little better.

I have a hard time entering into the feelings of those around me.

And it's not to say that I or you need to cry all the time or cry at everything, but I could be more emotional could be more emotionally aware most of the time.

And I'm sure there's a few of us in here who can relate to that.

But what a treat that in the holy scriptures we see the heart and love of our savior for the ones that he loves.

Verse 36.

So the Jews said, see how he loved him.

But some of them said, could not he open the eyes of the blind man also have kept this man from dying?

Did they take the tears of Jesus as an act of despair and weakness and not empathy and pain for the loss of a friend?

Then Jesus deeply moved again, came to the tomb.

It was a cave and a stone lay against it.

Jesus said, take away the stone.

Martha, the sister of the dead man said to him, Lord, by this time there will be an odor for he has been dead four days.

Jesus tells Martha to move the stone and it's been a few days.

And so the body of Lazarus had started decomposing.

It would have been quite smelly.

Or as it says in the King James version, by this time he stinketh.

Stinketh he would.

Jesus said to her, did I not tell you that if you believed you would see the glory of God?

So they took away the stone and Jesus lifted up his eyes and said, father, I thank you that you have heard me.

I know that you always hear me, but I said this on account of the people standing around that they may believe that you sent me.

When he had said these things, he cried out with a loud voice, Lazarus, come out.

The man who had died came out, his hands and feet bound with linen strips and his face wrapped with a cloth.

Jesus said to them, unbind him and let him go.

So Jesus reminds Martha of his initial comments when Mary and Martha had sent a messenger to Jesus.

Cause again, remember the beginning of this chapter, I guess at the end of the last chapter, Jesus is out near the river and not in Jerusalem.

And they send a messenger to him to tell Jesus that their brother in which Jesus loved was sick.

And then Jesus says that it is for the glory of God that Lazarus is sick.

That's the message that they get.

Now Jesus reminds Martha, hey, remember, it's for my glory, Lazarus is sick.

Then Jesus prays out loud, knowing that he did not need to pray out loud, but showing, but again, showing that Jesus's works, his miracles are attached to and being blessed by the father.

So Jesus' prayer here also shows us why he heals Lazarus.

Not so that his sisters would cash in on the return policy from the mourners, but that the people standing around, that they may believe that Jesus was sent by God.

Verse 42, I know that you always hear me, but I said this on account of the people standing here, that they may believe that you, Father, Yahweh sent me.

So Jesus said these things and then he screams, Lazarus, come out.

Then out comes Lazarus.

It's crazy.

And then Jesus says to him, unbind him and let him go.

That's where we're gonna stop this morning.

And as I reflect on these verses, action packed, we could so easily, very quickly get to what happens next, the response of it.

But one thing I don't want to do, which is intrinsic inside of me, is move past the feelings and the emotions that we see in this text, because we can so quickly move past them, but they are in our holy scriptures on purpose for us to see the love, emotion and care of Jesus and also the purpose of this, that Jesus was deeply moved by sin and death.

In fact, you could say Jesus was deeply moved by sin and death to get up from the right hand of God and to take on a baby, to take on the form of a baby.

That's how much Jesus was moved by sin and death, to leave his rightful place, to take on human flesh, to die for humanity, to die for the sins of the world.

And the question that I have is, am I that troubled with my sin and the sin around me?

Am I deeply moved by my sin?

Sometimes, and I think that's what scares me.

And again, not that this puts my salvation on the line, but I want ears to hear how God wants to sanctify me.

Again, it's the Spirit's work to sanctify.

It's not our work to sanctify, but am I willingly being sanctified or am I kicking and screaming towards my sanctification?

Where does that start?

With an open Bible and an open heart.

What's God speaking to me?

What's God saying?

What's God's will for my life?

I don't know, have you read it?

Are you in the Word?

And are you praying through the Word?

Are we letting the words of Scripture set the path of prayer, set the path of conversation for us as we pray?

An open Bible and an open heart.

An open Bible and an open heart.

How do we start our time this morning as we left, as our lovely children left us?

The teacher is here and is calling for you.

And when she heard it, she rose quickly and went to him.

An open Bible and an open heart.

Doesn't have to be rocket science.

You don't need a degree to open your Bible and to have an open heart because this text is alive.

It is moving, it is breathing.

And when we open up the Word and ask, God, what are you saying?

What are you speaking?

His Spirit will lead you and guide you.

And I think sometimes we can open the Bible and find Scriptures for everyone but ourselves.

Oh man, if only my husband got this.

Oh, I can't wait for the day our kids get this.

Oh, I can't wait till my coworker gets this.

I can't wait till, man, you gotta want it for yourself.

Sometimes it's hard to stand in front of the mirror that is the text.

But the beauty of it is that it shows us but the beauty of it is that it shows us the mercy and grace of Jesus to take care of what we could not accomplish.

To see the love of our Savior who weeps over sin and death, who weeps over the brokenness of our humanity and says, I can fix that.

I can fix it.

I can do that.

In fact, I will.

And thank God that we have the end of the story.

Thank God that we have the end of the story.

Thank God that we can see and we'll celebrate here in like a month's time the resurrection of our Savior.

An open Bible and an open heart.

Let me pray for us.

Jesus, we thank you for your word.

Oh, we thank you for your example.

How we fall short.

How we fall short of you, Jesus.

But thank you that you've given your Spirit to us and for us and for our good.

God, and help us.

Would your Spirit that is inside of us, sanctify us, help change our desires?

We know we can't do that on our own.

Mold us and shape us.

And Jesus, let us quickly come to you when we hear your voice and hear your Spirit in the little things, in the little things that we do.

We know we can't do the things, Jesus.

We know we won't be perfect, but we desire to follow you, our good shepherd.

Help us follow you.

We thank you that we see your heart and your love for people in this text.

Your heart and your love for your friends.

And we thank you, Jesus, that you call us your friends.

Spirit, would you desire in us to be moved by your heart, to be moved by you?

We thank you, Father, for your word.

We love you.

We praise you.

And it's in your Son's holy name that we pray.

And everyone said, amen.
