---
layout: sermon
title: "John 20:1-18"
date: "2025-08-31T16:22:07.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/107652436/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-8-1%2F406669432-44100-2-8dcf46dab7ddf.m4a"
duration: "33:18"
scripture: "John 20:1-18"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>The Resurrection of Jesus & why it’s necessary. </p>

guid: 440cd7c9-77b3-4c62-b27a-19275dc87247
episode_id: a3eb9cee
---

<p>The Resurrection of Jesus & why it’s necessary. </p>

## Transcription

Last week we covered the burial of Jesus, and of course this week as we turn to chapter 20 we see the resurrection of Jesus.

And so let's jump back up to that verse 1 there.

Now on the first day of the week Mary Magdalene came to the tomb early while it was still dark and saw that the stone had been taken away from the tomb.

Okay so first day of the week, right?

So that would be Sunday.

So Jesus was crucified on a Friday.

That's day one.

He's dead Saturday.

That's day two.

Then Sunday, Mary came to the tomb early in the morning while it was still dark.

So on the third day Jesus rose from the grave and the stone had been rolled away.

We could assume since the text tells us, John tells us that it was dark, the other Gospels would tell us that Mary Magdalene was not alone.

So we could assume that it could have been a gaggle of girls that went to the tomb, especially since it's not mentioning any men.

But anyways, so Mary gets to the tomb.

Maybe she had some sort of torch or maybe not.

We don't know.

The text doesn't tell us that, but we could assume since it just mentions that she saw the stone rolled away that she did not look into the tomb.

She just saw the stone rolled away and that was probably frightening enough.

And so verse two continues, so she ran, Mary Magdalene went to Simon Peter and the other disciple, the one whom Jesus loved.

So Peter and John and said to them, they have taken the Lord out of the tomb and we do not know where they have laid him.

So back in these days, it was very common that people would rob the grave.

It would very common for robbers to come and steal family heirlooms, things of value from the grave, and even take the bodies from the grave.

So Mary is probably thinking someone took Jesus.

And I mean, she kind of says that in the text.

And in fact, grave robbing was so prominent that it became a capital punishment around 40 AD.

So years after Jesus' resurrection, it became a capital punishment under Roman law for anyone who would rob the grave.

So it was prominent enough that they had to make a whole law about it.

So Peter and John hear this and verse three tells us, so Peter went out with the other disciple and they were going toward the tomb.

Both of them were running together, but the other disciple outran and reached the tomb first.

This might be one of my favorite passages of John.

John is in the midst of telling the most important story ever.

Like he's telling the resurrection of Jesus.

And like John knows, I mean John knows, right, like later in verse 20 or in chapter 20, he'll tell us, like, I have told you these things so that you may believe.

So John knows the weight of this whole scenario, the weight of everything.

And what does John say?

I beat Peter in a foot race.

That's what he says.

Just got to love it.

But the humor doesn't stop there.

Verse five.

And stooping to look in, he saw the linen cloths lying there, but he did not go in.

Verse six.

Then Simon Peter came following him and went into the tomb.

So John gets in the tomb first, but John at least had the decency to just look into the tomb.

He wasn't going to enter in.

He wasn't going to break in.

But then Peter comes trying to catch up to John and just runs right into the tomb.

I think that's hilarious.

So verse six continues.

He saw the linen cloths lying there.

Verse seven.

In the face cloth, which had been on Jesus' head, not lying with the linen cloths, but folded up in a place by itself.

Then the other disciple who had reached the tomb first also went in and saw and believed.

So Peter goes in, sees all the burial cloths there in the place where Jesus had laid them.

And then John tells us that he went in after Peter and he saw and believed.

He saw and believed, believed what?

So most of the early witnesses came to faith in Jesus as the resurrected Lord, not because they could find his corpse, but because they saw Jesus alive.

They came to faith in Jesus.

Like think about Thomas, which I think we get to here in this.

Yeah.

We will see Thomas here later in the chapter or chapter 21 where he literally puts his hands into the holes of Jesus.

So he came to faith in Jesus because he literally saw Jesus alive.

But John here says he came to faith in Jesus because he saw the grave cloths.

He's just saw, he saw the empty tomb.

He saw that, that the man who he witnessed go into the tomb in the grave cloths was no longer there and he saw and believed.

But then verse nine, we get this very interesting verse for as yet, they did not understand the scripture.

So, so John saw and believed, but they really had no, he, he believed it, but he wasn't like, he didn't understand all the Old Testament.

He didn't understand how Jesus fulfilled all these prophecies to understand, understand the scripture that he must rise from the dead. 10.

Then the disciples went back to their home.

So John admits he believed, but he did not understand the significance or the fulfillment of prophecy that happened with Jesus.

And this reminds me of a story in Luke chapter 24.

If you want to turn there, you can go there.

Luke 24, we'll start at verse 13.

Well, we won't, but Luke 24, verse 19, we'll get there where Jesus is resurrected.

And he appears to these two guys, he appears to these two guys on the road to Emmaus.

And these two guys were followers of Jesus, but not his apostles.

There were followers of Jesus, but not his apostles.

So let's just quickly get a very sort of 30,000 foot view of these two terms.

Cause we hear them tossed around a lot.

We hear apostles and we hear disciples.

We hear apostles and we hear disciples.

So just for clarity, the apostles would have been the 11 chosen by Jesus.

Again, there was 12 chosen, but we'll subtract Judas from that because well, he subtracted himself.

And so the 11, and then later in Acts, we would see Peter and the apostles, they would appoint someone else, but God had other plans in mind and he appoints Paul himself, Saul, Paul, Acts chapter nine.

And so Paul, we call the 12th apostle.

Everyone else is a, is a, is a disciple quickly summed up.

Apostle means sent ones or messengers with authority.

And they have the responsibility to perform signs and wonders, which we'll see all throughout the book of Acts.

And also they had the authority to write scripture.

Then disciple.

So apostle means sent ones or messengers with authority and a disciple means learners or students.

We are disciples of Jesus, right?

We are Jesus, we are his disciples.

We are learners.

We are students of Jesus and we learn and follow and we are formed by Christ.

So apostles, the 12, we're including Paul in that 12.

Some might, I'm not going to get into it.

We'll leave it at that.

And then disciples, the rest of us.

So back to the road of Emmaus, Luke chapter 24, these two disciples are walking to Emmaus and they are talking about what went down in Jerusalem and over the last weekend, over Passover weekend, they're just sort of talking about, man, did you like, this was just crazy, all the stuff that happened.

And then Jesus pops up, but they do not recognize that it is Jesus.

And he says, Hey, what are you guys talking about?

What are you guys talking about?

And then these guys are like, dude, have you been living under a rock?

Did you not hear or understand what has been happening in Jerusalem over the past few days?

Like, do you know what happened with Jesus of Nazareth?

And we can pick up in Luke 24 verse 19, where he says, where it says, he was a man.

This is the disciples who are filling Jesus in on what happened.

He was a man who was a prophet, mighty indeed, and word before God and all the people.

So they're saying Jesus was a prophet and he, he was mighty and word.

He spoke with authority and deed.

He did miracles. 20 and how our chief priests and rulers delivered him up to be condemned to death and crucified him.

But we had hoped that he was the one to redeem Israel.

Yes.

And besides all this, so not only that, not only did they kill him and we thought he was the Messiah, but not all, but, but even more, it's the third day since these things happens.

Moreover, some women of our company, so Mary Magdalene and the other women that were with Mary, they amazed us.

They were at the tomb early in the morning, 23, and they did not find his body.

They came back saying that they had even seen a vision of angels who said that he was alive.

Some of those who were with us went to the tomb and found it just as the woman had said, but they did not see.

So like literally the text that we are going over in John, we get a different summary of it right here in Luke.

Right.

You see all the elements.

The women went to the tomb early in the morning.

Right.

They didn't find his body.

And Mary came back saying that they even had a vision of an angel and then who said that he was alive and some of those who were with us went to the tomb and found it just so Peter and John, they went to the tomb and said it was just how they said it, but they did not see him.

So like everything that we're talking about in John, it's affirmed right here in Luke.

Let's continue verse 25.

And Jesus said to them, Oh foolish ones and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets had spoken.

Was it not necessary that the Christ should suffer these things and enter into his glory and beginning with Moses and all the prophets beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted them in all the scriptures, the things concerning himself.

Did you catch that Jesus is walking with these guys on the road to Emmaus and what does he do?

He uses the law, the Moses and the prophets, which back in ancient, uh, in ancient Israel, that would summarize all of the Old Testament.

They would include the Psalms into those.

Sometimes they, they didn't, but, and we, we usually don't now, but essentially what Jesus is saying or what the text tells us here is that Jesus used the whole Old Testament and showed them what he did, showed them how he was fulfilling prophecy.

Have you ever wondered like how all of these Old Testament passages made it into the Gospels and all these quotations and all these different things?

Of course it's inspired by the spirit, but also if Jesus is telling these guys and he had these 40 some odd days with his apostles, he was probably telling them, Hey, you know this passage in the Psalms, you know this, uh, you know, Genesis 15, you know this, you know that, you, as it says in whatever he told them how he fulfilled prophecy, cause they did not understand what did John say?

He, he believed, but he did not understand through the scriptures how all of these things were to happen.

That's what it tells us in verse nine, right?

If we're jumping back to John 20.

So that this story in Luke ends with a really cool way, right?

So the guys get to Emmaus and they invite Jesus again, they don't know what Jesus, they invite him into their home for dinner and Jesus breaks bread and then they go, Oh shoot, that's Jesus.

And then the text tells us that he vanished from their sight.

So like, I don't know if like he like broke bread and then like the bread drops and like he just like disappears or if like he just walked out of the door, we don't know, but the text tells us he vanished.

So do with it, what you will, I think that's funny.

Okay.

So let's jump back to chapter 20 verse 10.

I'm going to snag my water.

First 10 says then the disciples went back to their homes and I wonder what that talk was like back to their homes.

Was John trying to convince Peter like, dude, Jesus is alive.

We saw his grave close.

Like, like he had, he has to be alive.

He has to be alive.

Or was Peter just so discouraged, so just down and out because he betrayed Jesus.

So he was like, because he betrayed Jesus three times.

And is Peter just like feeling it?

Just like, I, I did Jesus died because of me.

Assuming that Peter's personality and everything we see throughout the text, I'm sure Peter felt incredibly guilty.

This is a man who was strong in his feels.

He again, he, this guy, he chopped off a guy's ear, right?

Like you gotta be pretty wacky to do that.

And so I could only imagine Peter is just rough feeling so bad.

The text tells us it goes back to their homes.

If we were to jump down a few verses in John chapter 20, it will later tell us that the 11 were all together in one home.

So is did they separate for a little while and they got back together?

We don't know if, you know, Peter and John actually went to their own separate homes and then later they all came together.

We don't know that.

And again, this is all speculation.

But I'm sure that John was in the minority of believing that Jesus was alive.

Verse 11 continues, But Mary stood weeping outside the tomb.

And as she wept, she stooped to look into the tomb and she saw two angels in white, sitting where the body of Jesus had lain, one at the head, one at the feet.

And they said to her, woman, why are you weeping?

She said to them, they have taken away my Lord and I do not know where they have laid him.

Mary is convinced that someone took Jesus.

She was probably already going to the tomb to tend to Jesus' body to add some more spices, which was customary of the time.

But now she has some angel visitors or maybe Mary was the visitor either way.

She's there with these angels and they might sound like me when one of my children is crying because they can't find their stuffed animal.

Like, why are you crying?

And also interesting note here, this is neither here nor there.

It's just a thought that had popped into my mind throughout this week.

But all throughout scripture, when angels are encountered, they always say, do not fear.

Do not be afraid.

And yet here is Mary and there's no with the angels and there's no such sentence.

So was Mary just like, just so down that the fact of seeing angels was just, there was no need to be afraid.

She was already so down and out.

She's like, they're just like, woman, why are you crying?

Like, why are you weeping?

Like, what's going on here?

Mary says, verse 14.

Oh, sorry.

Mary says they took my Lord and I don't know where he is.

So she's like, they've taken him away.

Verse 14, having said this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing.

But she did not know that it was Jesus and Jesus said to her, woman, why are you crying?

And Jesus said to her, woman, why are you weeping?

Whom are you seeking?

Supposing him to be the gardener.

And she said to him, sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have laid him and I will take him away.

Mary is desperate.

All she wants to do is see Jesus.

Where is he?

If you've taken him away, just please tell me where he is.

Just, I just, I need to see Jesus.

Please show me where you've put the body.

She's desperate.

And Jesus says to her, Mary, she turned and said to him in an Aramaic, rabboni, which means teacher.

Side note, do you remember when Jesus called your name?

For some of us, we grew up in church, we grew up believing.

Although, like John, not fully understanding the scriptures.

And others of us came to faith later in life.

And there can always be this desire, whether you came to faith later in life, or whether you grew up in church.

This desire, if you grew up in church, to have this amazing testimony, this sort of Paul, Saul to Paul moment in your own faith, the Damascus road experience.

Or on the reverse, this, man, I didn't grow up knowing the truth.

Look at my life the way I lived, all these things.

There's always this comparison of back and forth.

But however Jesus called your name, he called your name.

You are saved by grace through faith.

And it is not through your own works, but it is the gift of God.

Come on, somebody.

You put a mic in my hand and I'm gonna start preaching.

Where's the organ?

Regardless of how you had came to faith in Jesus, you have been given faith in Jesus.

The resurrected Jesus.

And I ran out of that grave.

Thank God he called you.

Do not forget your salvation.

Verse 17, Jesus said to her, Do not cling to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father, but go to my brothers and say to them, I am ascending to my Father and your Father to my God and your God.

Mary hears Jesus call her name.

Right?

And she cries out, Rabbo and I, teacher, and this verse tells us, she clung to Jesus.

It's almost like she tackled him.

Right?

Maybe it was an ankle tackle.

Maybe she was already down, like kind of on her knees, sort of weeping.

Well, it does tell us she was weeping.

So maybe she was down or could have been an ankle tackle, could have been a nice solid wrap up.

Whatever it was, she was hanging on to Jesus tightly.

And Jesus goes like, hey, it's all right.

You don't need to cling to me.

Everything's going to be okay.

In fact, I have a job for you to do.

Go and tell my brothers.

This is just a quick aside.

I think sometimes we can have these experiences or encounters with God or, you know, maybe for some of us it was like a high school camp or some sort of church experience that you just go like, man, I just felt so close to God then.

And you just want to cling to that moment.

Right?

Almost like Mary's clinging to Jesus in this moment.

And we forget that God has called us to do something.

He's called us to go and we're so focused on clinging.

We're so focused on staying.

We're so focused on ourselves and on what we experienced that we forget that Jesus has given us a command.

He's commissioned us to go.

So maybe even you're at a place right now in your faith in your walk where you're like, man, I just felt so close to God back then.

I would say to you, stop clinging to a time and an event and actually start doing what God has called you and told us to do and go and do that and see what he has for you now.

In verse 18, Mary Magdalene went and announced to the disciples, I have seen the Lord and he said these things to her.

What did Mary do?

She obeyed the resurrected man.

Some of us, we need to just obey the resurrected man.

Do what he has called us to do.

As we close a few weeks ago, I answered the question, what is finished?

We talked about what is finished, right?

Jesus' final words on the cross.

It is finished.

What is finished?

We talked about that.

And this week, I want to ask and answer the question, why the resurrection?

Why the resurrection?

Why did Jesus need to resurrect?

First, Paul will tell us in Romans that Jesus said he was the Son of God and his resurrection proves it.

Romans 1 verse 4.

And I can send this list to you later.

We are having some technical difficulties with the screen.

There are supposed to be slides and all those cute things, but it is what it is.

Romans 1 verse 4.

And was declared to be the Son of the God.

Jesus was declared to be the Son of God in power according to the Spirit of holiness by his resurrection from the dead.

Jesus Christ our Lord.

So Jesus resurrected from the dead.

He said he was the Son of God and his actions prove him to be the Son of God.

Paul will also tell us his resurrection secures our justification.

His resurrection secures our justification.

Romans 4, 24 through 25.

Jesus our Lord who was delivered up for our trespasses and raised for our justification.

So Jesus was delivered up.

Again, that's kind of a key word there up for our trespasses.

So he died his blood for our trespasses for our sins and raised for our justification.

Jesus raising from the dead.

For our justification.

Jesus's resurrection broke the power of death and initiated the new creation.

First Corinthians 15 verse 22.

For as in Adam all die.

So also in Christ shall all be made alive.

Jesus's resurrection broke the power of death.

For as in Adam all die.

So also in Christ shall all be made alive.

We are becoming a new creation.

In Christ Jesus.

Then without the resurrection there is no ascension.

There is no heavenly reign or intercession for us.

Hebrews 7 tells us consequently he Jesus is able to save to the uttermost those who draw near to God through him through Jesus.

Since he always lived through the resurrection, he was able to save to the uttermost those who draw near to God through him through Jesus.

Since he always lives, right, he resurrected.

Since he always lives to make intercession for them.

Jesus is our high priest who intercedes for us.

Jesus lives so that we can live.

A dead savior cannot be a living mediator.

A dead savior cannot be a living mediator.

Without the resurrection there is no redemption, no salvation, no heaven.

Without the resurrection this is all pointless.

But thankfully Jesus is resurrected and this is all meaningful because of him.

All of this is meaningful because of him.

Us turning to the table remembering his body and his blood.

Us reading the scriptures.

Us singing songs of praise and worship.

All of this is meaningful.

Us fellowshipping together is meaningful.

Because this is all for him.

And beyond just the walls of this building, our whole life has now meaning and purpose because he is resurrected.

All of it is meaningful because of him.

So are you living on purpose?

Are you actually doing what the resurrected man said to do?

I'm reminded of, I said I was landing the plane and then here I go.

I see I have time so.

I'm reminded of the story of Mary and Martha.

Martha of course was busy running around and Mary was laying at the feet of Jesus.

There is a time to sit, to be attentive to Jesus just as Mary was then.

But what did Mary do here?

She was obedient to what the Lord had told her to do.

There is a time for us to sit and look at the words of Jesus.

There is a time for us to meditate on scripture.

Bless you.

All the time we should be meditating on scripture.

But there is also a time for us to not just read scripture.

But to actually go and do what Jesus is calling us to do.

And this space, this room is great.

Looks great, feels great, all the things.

But if we just stay as us here in this room, then we're missing out on people that we can overflow this room with.

And again, it's not about numbers.

It's about people hearing the gospel message.

It's about people going and living out the gospel message.

So again, who?

Or maybe let's start with this.

What is Jesus asking you to do in this particular moment where you are in life?

In fact, right now we're going to pray and we're just going to ask the spirit that he would convict us, that he would put people in our hearts and in our minds of who we need to be bringing with us.

Who needs to be in this room with us?

Who needs to be in a community like this?

And then we need to not just have that information, but we actually need to go and do something about it.

Let's pray together.

Jesus, we thank you that you are the resurrected one, that our faith in you is a faith in a God who actually does what he says he would do.

That he lived, that he died, and that he rose from the grave.

We thank you for that promise.

We thank you for that truth.

We thank you that it is because of that, that we can put our faith in you, that we can be assured of our justification, that we can have the confidence of a new life and new creation that is for us.

And that we can know that our lives have purpose and meaning far beyond this earth.

That we will spend eternity with you.

Spirit right now would you begin to put people in our hearts and in our minds of who you would have us boldly ask.

To come to church with us and not just come to church, but be part of your body, your people together.

God would you help us be obedient to what you've called us to do?

Thank you Spirit for empowering us and giving us the ability to obey you, to trust you.

We thank you for this morning together.

It's in Jesus' name.

Everyone said Amen.
