---
layout: sermon
title: "John 8:31-59"
date: "2025-02-09T14:29:20.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/98286086/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-1-10%2F394611769-44100-2-f559e7d88b16b.m4a"
duration: "33:46"
scripture: "John 8:31-59"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>Do the work of Abraham.</p><p>Be a sailboat.</p>\n
guid: 45d40494-c033-414a-a14e-2180be529d37
episode_id: 72dd6d6e
---

<p>Do the work of Abraham.</p><p>Be a sailboat.</p>

## Transcription

Before I forget, our books for our study came in.

They're in the kitchen.

We'll put them over here.

Take one.

We got enough for every...

It's a book on...

It's a marriage book.

Because, yeah, we...

I mean, whether you're married or you're about to be married, we all need help in our marriage.

We're two broken people, and so we all need to learn new things, have different tools in our toolbox.

And the thing I really love about this book...

Funny story.

The author actually did our Kayla and my premarital counseling.

And in one of the chapters, my name is mentioned and a fiance, but the story is not ours.

So I just need to...

I need to throw that out there.

They didn't know her name.

Kathleen.

Yeah, that's a funny story for another time.

I guess I can tell you.

It was our first premarital meeting, and we were sitting down, and he knew me because we were both on staff at the same church.

And then we're sitting down to pray, and it's him and his wife and us two, and he goes, you know, he opens a prayer, thank you God so much for Nate and Kathleen.

And we're like...

I'm like sitting there, and we're like squeezing each other like, who's Kathleen?

Am I here with the wrong woman?

No, but anyways...

I think he's all about getting his blessing.

Yeah.

Yeah.

He's like, so who's Kathleen?

Tell me.

Anyways, the one thing I love about this book is that it's very practical, and it's not a book that's going to teach you how to like, oh, this is how you like love your spouse.

It's like, no, this is how you work together in marriage together.

There's a ton of practical tips.

And so, yeah, we got one for everyone because everyone here is married or very soon will be.

So, yeah, whether you're with us or not on Wednesday nights, read through it.

It's, yeah, it's great.

That's all I have to say about that.

Let's turn to John chapter eight.

Just again, so we can get rerouted in the story, in the context.

We will take it from... let's take it from verse 30, and then we'll go through the rest of the chapter.

Again, Jesus is there with Pharisees, and then verse 30, it'll pick up and then we'll go from there.

Somebody wants to read verse 30 through the end of the chapter.

As he was saying these things, many believed in him.

So Jesus said to the Jews who had believed in him, If you abide in my words, you are truly my disciples, and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.

They answered him, We are offspring of Abraham, and you have never been enslaved to anyone.

How is it that you say you need to come free?

Jesus answered them, Truly, truly I say to you, Everyone who practices sin is a slave to sin.

The slave does not remain in the house forever, the son remains with you forever.

So if the son sets you free, you will be free indeed.

I know that you are offspring of Abraham, yet you speak to children because my word lies no place in you.

I speak of what I have done with my fathers, and you do what you have heard from your father.

They answered him, Abraham is our father.

Jesus said to them, If you were Abraham's children, you would be doing the works Abraham did, but now you seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I have heard from God.

This is not what Abraham did.

You are doing the works your father did.

They said to him, We were not born of sexual immorality, we have one father, even God.

Jesus said to them, If God were your father, you would love me, for I came from God and I am human.

I came not of my own accord, but he sent me.

Why do you not understand what I say?

It is because you cannot bear to hear my words.

You are of your father the devil, and your will is to do your father's desires.

He was a murderer from the beginning and he is not saying the truth because there is no truth in him.

When he lies, he speaks out of his own character, for he is a liar and a father of lies.

So because I tell the truth, you do not believe me.

Which one of you convicts me of sin?

If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me?

Whoever is of God hears the word of God.

The reason why you do not hear them is that you are not of God.

The Jews answered him, Are we not right in saying that you are a Samaritan and have a demon?

Jesus answered, I do not have a demon, but I honor my fathers and you dishonor me.

Yet I do not keep my own glory.

There is one who keeps it, and he is the judge.

Truly, truly I say to you, if anyone keeps my word, he will never see death.

The Jews said to him, Now we know that you have a demon.

Abraham died, as did the prophets, yet you say, anyone keeps my word, and he will never see death.

Are you greater than our father Abraham who died?

And the prophets died?

Who do you make yourself out to be?

Jesus answered, If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing.

It is my father who glorifies me, of whom you say, he is our God.

You have not known him.

I know him.

If I were to say that I do not know him, I would be a liar like you.

But I do not know him, and I do know him, and he is his word.

Your father Abraham rejoiced that he would see my day.

He saw it and was glad.

So the Jews said to him, You are not yet fifty years old, and have you seen Abraham?

Jesus said to them, Truly, truly I say to you, before Abraham was, I am.

So they picked up the stones with their hands, but Jesus hid himself and went out to the temple.

Okay, a lot here.

Let's get right in.

So Jesus turns again.

He was there with the Pharisees and Jews, and some of the then Jesus turns to the Jews who would believe in him.

How we know?

I don't know.

I don't know if he did like a raise your hand if you believe in me.

Probably not.

And then he says, If you abide in my word, you are truly my disciples, and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.

Let's remember here, because we've heard that last part of the verse.

You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.

We've heard that out of context probably more times than in context.

So let's remember to the ancient Jew, belief and action were the same thing.

If you believe something, you acted upon it.

If you believed in God, you obeyed God.

So Jesus is saying to these new believers, abide.

You believe in me, so abide in me.

Abide, or in other words, dwell, or be with, remain, or stay, like literally like stay in the same place with me.

Like it was like, abide, like come into my abode and abide.

Like come to my house.

That's like essentially what Jesus is saying in the context of that word there.

And abide in my word, so dwell with me, be with me, remain with me, stay with, stay in my word, and you are truly my disciples, and you will know the truth.

What truth?

The truth that Jesus had just been arguing, that he is from God, and he is of God, and he is God.

That Jesus came to die for our sins.

We see that in the in the text right above this.

Here it is, verse 24.

You would die in your sins, for unless you believe that I am he, will die in your sins.

That truth, if you remain my disciple, that truth will set you free.

Number three, disciples follow Jesus.

A disciple stays with Jesus.

They dwell with Jesus.

I'm reminded of John 6, where Jesus says, I am the bread of life, and shortly after this, his followers leave him.

This is a hard truth.

Who can stand?

Who can take this truth?

So they followed him for a short while, and then they left.

But then we have Peter, says, Lord, to whom shall we go?

You have the words of eternal life, and we have believed, and have come to know that you are the holy one of God.

This is a follower, a disciple of Jesus.

We stay with Jesus.

Even when it's inconvenient, even when it doesn't make sense, even when our feelings don't match up with our belief, we stay with Jesus.

Verse 33, the Jews respond, We are offspring of Abraham, and have never been enslaved to anyone.

How is it that you say you will become free?

The Jews are thinking of earthly slavery.

They're going, we're not slaves to Rome.

We don't, we're not sure we're under Roman rule, but we're not their servants.

We've never been slaves to anyone.

And Jesus tells them, truly, truly, or let me tell you the truth.

I say to you, everyone who practices sin is a slave to sin.

The slave does not remain in the house forever.

The son remains forever.

So if the son sets you free, you will be free indeed.

We are a slave to sin.

Our sin keeps us from God.

But Jesus, hallelujah, The son has set you free.

Reminded of the old Mary Mary song.

Take the shackles off my feet so I can dance.

I just want to praise you.

The son has freed you from sin and slavery.

I just want to praise you.

Jesus continued to say, verse 37, I know that you are offspring of Abraham, yet you seek to kill me because my word finds no place in you.

I speak of what I have seen with my father, and you do what you have heard from your father.

Okay, so Jesus is starting to make a distinction here between his father God and the father of the Jews.

And he's going to, I'm getting ahead of myself.

Let's continue to read the text.

They answered him, Abraham is our father.

Jesus said to them, if you were Abraham's children, you would be doing the works Abraham did.

But now you seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God.

This is not what Abraham did.

You are doing the works your father did.

Okay, so again, we see this all the time and especially in John, this like, over these two sort of teams or these two sides over here and over here.

So we see Jesus and even attaching himself to Abraham.

And then we see you are not Abraham's children.

So the question is, what is the work Abraham did?

Right, it says, Jesus said, if you were doing the work, you would be doing the works Abraham did.

So the question is, what is the work Abraham did?

The answer is faith.

Faith is the work Abraham did.

Hebrews 11, 8 says, by faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to a place that he was to receive an inheritance.

And he went out not knowing where he was going.

By faith.

So we see that's the work of Abraham, faith.

But instead of faith in Jesus, these Jews are going to try and kill Jesus instead.

And then they try to get smart with Jesus.

They said to him, we were not born of sexual immorality.

We have one father, even God.

So some scholars say this is a they're digging at Jesus's parents and the whole birth story of a virgin birth.

Right.

Obviously that would bring some skepticism and of him coming from sexual immorality.

Your mother surely was not a virgin.

They had sex before they got married.

And so you come from sexual immorality.

That's what some scholars say.

Others say it could be connected to verse 48, which will where they reference the Samaritans and of course their hatred for Samaritans.

But Jesus, he then dunks on them.

Verse 42.

Jesus says there in verse 43.

When we look at the original language here, Jesus is not saying that they do not understand his words, by the way he was talking.

So it wasn't a matter of like, you know, Jesus isn't speaking in another language.

They cannot.

It's not that they don't understand.

It seems as if Jesus is saying they do not understand the revelation of God, the revealing of God put in front of them by Jesus and his words.

The word hear is not just a listening issue.

It's a again, it's an obedience issue.

It's a it's a the Jews are not obedient to the words of God.

They hear them just fine.

They're going in one ear and they're not sticking.

They're not obeying.

They're not believing, if you will.

Then Jesus proceeds to say that they are from the devil and it has very little to do with them being Jewish, but everything to do with their relationship to Jesus.

Satan was a murderer from the beginning, Jesus says.

Again, we can go back to Genesis.

God told Adam and Eve, if you eat the fruit, you will die.

Then Satan asked them, did God really say this?

Did God really say, will you really die?

And yes, they ate of the fruit and they became dead in their sin.

And so are we dead in our sin.

And so the unbeliever's father is the devil.

We are in darkness.

We are in death.

We are the opposite of God.

D.

A.

Carson, who's a theologian and one of the most credible commentators on the book of John, he put it this way.

The children of God will so love the truth that they will believe in Jesus.

The children of the devil will be so characterized by lies that they will not be able to accept the truth precisely because it is the truth.

They reject it completely.

So the question is then, how does one find the truth?

How does one come to believe?

Jesus tells us in John chapter six, the truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

The truth is the truth.

That I should lose nothing of all that he has given me.

God gave Jesus his people.

And he will raise them up on the last day.

It's easy for us to see Jesus as...

Oh, sorry.

Chapter eight, verse 46.

Which one of you convicts me of sin?

If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me?

Whoever is of God, hears the words of God.

The reason why you do not hear them is that you are not of God.

It's easy for us to see Jesus as telling the truth.

But for those Jews, they would say that he is guilty of sin.

Right?

He's guilty of healing a man on the Sabbath.

So he broke Sabbath law.

And he's guilty of blasphemy.

He has called himself equal with God.

He has called himself God.

Blasphemy.

Which leads them...

Which leads to the question, why do they not believe him?

Why do they not believe Jesus?

Clearly they do not like him and disagree with him.

But they have yet to find him guilty.

Because even when Jesus talks about healing the man on the Sabbath, he gave his defense.

And they didn't kill him then.

So...

But Jesus then tells them the reason they do not...

The reason they do not find him guilty, or the reason they do not believe in him, is because they do not hear him.

They are not of God.

They do not belong to God.

How can one hear God if they do not belong to God?

This only frustrates the Jews even more in verse 48.

The Jews answered him, Are we not right in saying that you are a Samaritan and have a demon?

And again, they're sort of poking fun or just going like, This guy's crazy.

Like, what are we doing?

He's off his rocker.

He's got to be a Samaritan and has a demon.

And then Jesus answered. 49, And then Jesus answered. 49, Again, I tell you the truth.

If anyone keeps my word, he will never see death.

The Jews are in the room going, See, we told you.

He is crazy.

This guy is nuts.

The Jews said to him, Now we know that you have a demon.

Abraham died, as did the prophets.

Yet you say, if anyone keeps my word, he will never taste death?

Are you greater than our father Abraham who died, and the prophets who died?

Who do you make yourself out to be?

Jesus answered, If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing.

It is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say, he is our God.

But you have not known him.

I know him.

If I were to say that I do not know him, I would be a liar like you.

But I do know him, and I keep his word.

Your father Abraham rejoiced that he would see my day.

He saw it and was glad.

Why would Abraham rejoice?

Because God's promised to Abraham, Make you descend into many nations, and the whole world will be blessed.

That's a paraphrase.

Jesus obviously is the fulfillment of that.

And so Abraham would rejoice at the promise of God being kept.

The promise being fulfilled in Jesus.

And he saw it, probably when he got to heaven, and was glad. 57.

So the Jews said to him, you are not yet 50 years old.

This is just like a, ah, he's in his 20s, his 30s.

Like, we don't know his exact age.

We're just going to round up to the nearest number.

Or Jesus didn't age very well.

We don't know that.

You are not yet 50 years old.

And have you seen Abraham?

They're going like, dude, Abraham was like thousands of years ago.

What are you saying, dude?

You've seen him?

And Jesus said to them, truly, truly, or I tell you the truth again, I say to you, before Abraham was, I am.

Jesus again proclaims, before Abraham was, I am.

Jesus has been there from the beginning.

Jesus is equaling himself to God.

Jesus is God.

Simply by Jesus using that phrase, I am.

And the word there in the original language, it attaches Jesus to God.

And there's many examples, but here's two from Isaiah.

Isaiah 41-4 says, I the Lord with the first of them with the last, I am he.

Isaiah 43-13, yes, from ancient days, I am he.

Before Abraham was, I am.

From the first of them, from the last of him.

From ancient days, I am.

We also don't have to look too far back in John, the very beginning.

And the beginning was the word.

The word was with God.

The word was God.

But the crowd had heard enough.

Verse 59, so they picked up stones to throw at him, but Jesus hid himself and went out of the temple.

There is, this passage is chock full with sermons, which could go several different ways.

But one thing I want us to go home with, one thing that I want to drill in on here in our last few minutes, is verse 39.

If you were Abraham's children, you would be doing the works Abraham did.

What does it mean for us to do the work of Abraham?

What does it mean for us to have faith?

Again, Hebrews 11-8, By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to a place that he was to receive as an inheritance, and he went out not knowing where he was going.

What does it mean for us to walk by faith and not by sight?

As the author of Hebrews said, to have faith and not know where we are going.

To have the, to do the work of Abraham, to have the faith of Abraham, to trust even though we're not going, not knowing where we're going.

First, we need to have faith in his word.

We need to believe what Jesus said, has told us in his word.

And not just belief, but that belief that he was going to receive, belief, but that belief takes action.

So we believe what Jesus has told us in his word and obey his word even when it doesn't make sense.

Even when it's uncomfortable, even when it doesn't feel right, even when it's going to be maybe shameful, or even when it's not going to work out the way we would desire it to be, we remain obedient.

We have to have faith in his word and that faith is obedience.

That faith is action.

Have faith in his word and have faith in his spirit.

Believe that you are in fact filled with his spirit.

And we can walk with confidence knowing that God's spirit is at work in us, that God's spirit is actually sanctifying you.

You are not making yourself better, but the spirit at work in you is making you more out to be like God.

We have to believe that.

We have to believe that Christ's spirit is not only in me and that can change my confidence, that can change my outlook, that can change my attitude, but that also he's at work in me.

And I have to have faith in that.

Believe that you are filled with his spirit and walk with confidence that God's spirit is at work in you.

Earlier this week, I heard an analogy and it was an analogy of a sailboat.

And we in our life, in our pursuit of more, we so desire to be power boats.

We love to have a big engine cutting through water, getting to our destination as quickly as possible.

We want to be power boats.

We just want to go, go, go, go, go.

But a life led by the spirit is a sailboat.

It's going at a pace that's out of our control.

Sometimes not easy.

I don't know if you've ever been in a sailboat.

Sometimes it's, I actually don't know if I have been in a sailboat, but I've watched people on sailboats.

Going at a pace that's out of your control.

Sometimes difficult because the wind changes directions and you need to adjust your sail.

Sometimes it's not safe.

Sometimes the wind is fast.

Sometimes it's not safe.

Sometimes it's not safe.

It's faster than you would like it to be.

And oftentimes difficult because it's not the direction that you would like it to go.

But it's at the pace of the one who is in control.

It's at a pace of the one who speaks to the wind and the waves and they obey him.

That is a life that walks with the spirit.

That is, has faith, even though we don't know where we're going.

Even though we don't know the exact direction of exactly what to do in this scenario or that scenario.

But we can have faith in his word.

We can have faith and know to follow his word, obey his word, that his spirit is inside of us, that he has filled us with his spirit.

And so I can trust that he is leading me and guiding me.

It's the work of Abraham, his faith.

That we have an inheritance, eternal life.

But we're not sure how we're going to get there.

But we have faith in Jesus that his word is true, that he was who he said he was, and that he's given us his spirit and he's given us his life.

And so I can trust that he is my spirit and regardless of my situation, regardless of my own human-ness, that he in fact is using me, that he has filled me, and I can step into situations, I can step into life knowing that my God is in control.

And so I will obey you.

I will have faith in your word.

I will obey you even when it doesn't make sense.

And I'll be a good old sailboat.

Let's have faith in his word.

Let's have faith in his spirit.

Let's close in prayer.

Jesus, we thank you for your word that it is truth.

We thank you, Jesus, that you are not a liar, that you are in fact the Son of God, that you are in fact the one who sets us free.

And Jesus, you are a man of your word.

And we want to be your disciples.

We want to remain with you.

We want to stay with you.

We trust you, God, that you are working even when we don't see it, even when we don't believe it, that you are working in our midst.

And that as we remain with you, as we stay with you, as we follow you, God, not only will we see more of who you are, but we will see the path you have laid out before us, even not knowing where we are going.

Help us, Father, because that's hard.

At least we think it's hard.

We want to control our own lives.

At least we think it's hard.

We want to control each and every element of our lives.

But help us to follow you.

First and foremost, let that be the thing that we hang our hat on, that we follow you, Jesus.

Not to earn your approval, not to earn your grace or your mercy.

You've already given that to us.

But because we desire to be with you.

We desire to be like Mary sitting at your feet when there's much work to be done.

We thank you, Jesus, for who you are.

We thank you that we worship you.

We thank you that you first loved us.

It's in your name, everyone said.

Amen.

Now go be little sailboats.
