---
layout: sermon
title: "John 14:12-17"
date: "2025-05-18T12:58:59.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/102871148/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-4-19%2F400565511-44100-2-6edbe9da958b3.m4a"
duration: "31:21"
scripture: "John 14:12-17"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>What are greater works? Name it and claim it? Love and obedience and The Holy Spirit. </p>\n
guid: 694e78ff-f649-45c6-b640-8fb1ce6021df
episode_id: abec0cb7
---

<p>What are greater works? Name it and claim it? Love and obedience and The Holy Spirit. </p>

## Transcription

This morning, let's for our reading, we can start at John chapter 14 verse 8 and we will read through 17.

So verse 8 through 17, those couple paragraphs there will do the trick.

John 14 verse 8 through 17.

Awesome.

So as we started this chapter, for the next few chapters, it's this sort of upper room discourse.

It's a lot of Jesus with his disciples and he's really beginning to prepare them for what is to come, which is Jesus's death, resurrection, and then his ascension, which then if we're thinking with the end in mind, really what Jesus preparing them for is when he leaves and they start the ministry.

He's starting to really prepare them for this.

And this text we're going to look at verse 12 through 17.

That's where we're going to camp out this morning.

There's a few things and so I'll just kind of hit them at the top and then we'll sort of break it down and look at the text in that way because it's kind of just what the text lays out for us.

So the first thing we're going to look at and we're going to answer the question.

What are the greater works?

Right verse 12.

He says you will do you will you will do greater works than than me.

That's what Jesus says.

The second thing we're going to look at is I just put it like name it and claim it right because Jesus asks like if you ask anything in my name, it'll be yours.

So we're going to look at that third.

We're going to look at love and obedience.

Right because he says if you love me, you will obey my commands.

Then fourthly, we will look at the Holy Spirit and the helper.

So let's dive in verse 12.

Truly truly.

I say to you whoever believes in me will also do the works that I do and greater works than these will he do because I am going to the Father.

Okay, so let's again take a step back.

Remember the whole context what's happening in this chapter.

He's now with 11 of his disciples started with 12 in this upper room, but one left.

Of course, his name is Judas, right?

And Jesus tells the 12 that one is going to betray him then Judas leaves and then Peter is told by Jesus that he's going to deny him three times.

And then Jesus tells the disciples he's going to leave them and the disciples are troubled.

And the disciples are freaking out like Jesus is going to leave us and then he tells them verse 12 truly truly.

And again, we've seen this all throughout the book of John.

But Jesus that truly truly is like take this to the bank write it down in stone in stone.

I tell you the truth is really what's communicating communicating there.

I tell you the truth nothing but the truth.

So help me God truly truly whoever believes in me will also do the works that I do and greater works than these because I'm going to the Father.

So the question is what are these greater works?

What works what works does Jesus consider greater?

What works does does Jesus consider to be the greater works now?

It would be silly not to us.

Of course the greater works that Jesus does other than salvation will put that one to the side for the moment because we know salvation just comes through Jesus.

He's the only that's the only work that so we're putting salvation aside for the moment.

But to us the greater works would be all his miracles, right?

Like those are pretty great like water to wine.

Yes, please like, you know feeding 5000 raising Lazarus from the dead raising Jairus's daughter from the dead all these all these like those are some great works.

Those are pretty great.

But if we all if we again take into account what even just the Great Commission.

What does Jesus tell his disciples to do?

Does he tell them to specifically go and heal the sick?

Does he tell them like raise raise the dead?

Does he say in the Great Commission to do that?

What does he say?

Go make disciples do what I did with you.

And then of course, if we look at the Great Commission if we even we can go even smaller.

Let's look at what Jesus beginning to prepare his disciples for in this upper room discourse.

It is not more miracles.

Although they will do miracles.

He is preparing them for the Holy Spirit.

He's preparing them for his ascension and the coming of the of the Spirit which will happen in Acts chapter 2.

That's what Jesus is beginning to prepare his disciples for.

He is not preparing them for for miracles for for holy water.

He's preparing them to make disciples.

Jesus starting to plant seeds of the sending of the Spirit at Pentecost and that same Spirit that is one with Jesus, right?

The Father Spirit the Son, they're all one.

The same Spirit that is one with Jesus.

We believe is in every believer not just because we believe that but because scripture tells us that.

I won't just say scripture tells us that I'll read it.

Acts 10 44 while Peter was still saying these things the Holy Spirit fell on all who heard the word and the believers from among the circumcised who had come with Peter were amazed because the gift of the Holy Spirit was poured out even on Gentiles.

Now the point of this passage specifically was the Spirit in dwelling Gentiles.

But I bring up this text to say was belief in Jesus and the gospel that the Spirit came that the Spirit fell and even on Gentiles.

And Jesus is preparing his disciples for what was to come after his death resurrection and second and ascension.

So if we think about the context of this passage, I believe the greater works that Jesus is talking about is the commission that he would send them out to do in Acts 28 and in Acts 1 8 and that the gospel would spread not just in Jerusalem, Judea and Samaria but to the ends of the earth.

That is the greater works.

Earthly healing is great.

Jesus doing those miracles is amazing fantastic.

Miraculous even but Jesus didn't just come for that.

Jesus came of course to heal our eternity.

Not just our earthly problems.

Jesus brought salvation and commissioned us to share his good news.

Okay, last time.

What are the great work Jesus is talking about?

The greatest work is the spreading of the gospel to the whole world.

I don't know about you, but I feel like all the time not all the time most of time growing up the greater works were more miracles.

Like look at all these great works of Jesus did more miracles, which I'm not saying God can't still heal.

God can still do these things.

I believe he can.

He could do whatever he wants to do.

But to say that that is the greatest work is to is to miss salvation.

It's to miss the spreading of the gospel what he's called us in to do with him.

Verse 13 and 14.

Whatever you ask in my name this I will do that the father may be glorified in the sun.

And if you ask me anything in my name, I will do it.

What an amazing God we serve.

He said whatever you ask in my name this I will do.

That's incredible.

But we need to keep reading that the father may be glorified in the sun.

Right Jesus says whatever you ask in my name this I will do that the father may be glorified in the sun.

If you ask me anything in my name, I will do it.

People love that first part and get disappointed.

Or maybe even start some Ponzi scheme.

But those things are done in vain.

Jesus says that the father may be glorified in the sun.

Whatever you ask that the father may be glorified in the sun.

If you ask me anything in my name, I will do it.

But what about when you genuinely ask God for something?

When you're with all the humility you have with all of the belief you have that something is going to happen.

And you genuinely ask God for something and maybe you think your heart is in the right place.

But it still doesn't happen.

Is God wrong for not meeting your need?

Did you not pray hard enough?

Whatever that means.

Do you lack faith?

Whatever that means.

What a terrible interpretation of the text.

And also pretty hurtful and pretty hurtful comments on prayer.

First, we must take into account before we just build our theology on prayer around this one passage.

We must take into account all of Jesus' teaching on prayer, which we're not going to get into for time's sake.

And second, let us not lose context of this passage.

What is Jesus trying to do?

He's beginning to prepare his disciples for what is happening after his death, resurrection and ascension into heaven.

We must take that context into context for Jesus' words here.

And third, if you find yourself praying for something good, praying for something from a pure heart, let me remind you of Jacob, who was beaten, thrown into slavery by his brothers, then thrown into a prison, and then landed in the palace.

And at the end of the story, looked at his brothers and said, what you meant for evil, God worked for good.

Now, I'm not saying we're all going to end up in a palace.

But what I am saying is we can look at the story of Jacob and say God, through slavery, through prison, God used that for God's good and God's glory.

Romans 8, God will work all things together for those who love him and are called according to his purposes.

Speaking of love, verse 15.

If you love me, you will keep my commands, commandments.

If you love me, you will keep my commandments.

Some like to read this verse and interpret it to say, if you love me, then you are obligated to keep my commandments.

In other words, love is shown strictly by obedience, which to me feels a bit robotic, might lack some authenticity.

And I think we've all heard of the couples who after the kid, their kids leave the house, they stay married, but they hate each other.

And the only reason they stay together is because they made a promise, right, which is commendable at some end, but also a pretty crappy way to live.

Jesus does not want you to love him just because you got baptized when you were a kid.

This is me teaching to myself.

Jesus does not want you to love him just because you got baptized when you were a kid.

And in fact, if that's your perspective, I actually might question if you are really saved.

True justification always generates a response of obedience.

Say it again.

True justification always generates a response of obedience.

Look at how God, how much God loves me.

Look at how God has saved me.

Of course, I want to follow him.

Of course, I desire to follow him.

Our justification in Christ will always lead to sanctification through the Spirit.

Our justification in Christ will always lead to sanctification through the Spirit.

Martin Luther, not the King Junior, the reformer, said it this way.

Christ does not say, if you fear me, if you honor me, if you serve me, though all of these things belong to the Christian life, but what Christ says is, if you love me, for love makes a willing and joyful servant, not driven by compulsion, but by delight and the beloved.

I'll read that again.

Christ does not say, if you fear me, if you honor me, if you serve me, though all of these things belong to the Christian life, but if you love me, love makes a willing and joyful servant, not driven by compulsion, but by delight and the beloved.

I delight in the Lord.

I love the Lord.

And so I want to obey him.

I want to do as he says.

I want to follow after him.

No one's, I'm not, there's not a, there's no guilt being pulled here.

There's no, no one's twisting my finger or twisting my arm.

No one is doing any of those things.

But because I love the Lord, I obey him.

I follow him.

I serve him.

I honor him.

Verse 16.

And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another helper to be with you forever.

Even the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, but it neither sees him nor knows him.

You will know him, for he dwells with you and will be in you.

Just remind us when we talked about this a few weeks ago, but most of the time now from, again, I think it was from Chapter 13 onward, Jesus and John writing this down will use that word, the world there, quite often, and he's making a distinction between disciples, not disciples.

The world are not disciples.

So when he says, or not those who believe, whom the world cannot receive, they cannot receive the spirit because they do not believe in Jesus.

They do not believe in the spirit.

Back to it.

So Jesus tells his disciples, when I get to heaven, not only am I going to prepare a place for you, right?

He said that a few verses earlier.

I'm also not leaving you on your own.

So Jesus said, just told his disciples, I'm preparing a place for you, and I'm also not going to leave you stranded.

Hallelujah.

Jesus is asking the Father to give another helper, to be with them forever.

Like I mentioned earlier, we're going to spend the next few chapters looking at the Holy Spirit, diving into all those things.

And so we're going to have a lot of time.

And so this is not the end-all, be-all teaching on the Spirit.

This is where we're just scratching the surface.

But as we grow in our understanding of the helper, of the Spirit of Truth, I want Scripture to interpret Scripture.

So we're going to look at the Spirit in the Old Testament.

We're going to go to Numbers, Chapter 11, because our God is the same yesterday, today, and forever.

God is unchanging.

And so we can look at the Spirit in the Old Testament and have a greater understanding of the Spirit today.

Numbers 11.

Let me give a recap while you're turning there, or pressing buttons and looking there.

Numbers 11.

So the Israelites are complaining to Moses.

And Moses is getting mad.

He's getting frustrated.

And he's got the burdens of all these people.

And they're asking for all these things.

And he's just like a mom when all of your children and your husband all come up and ask for different things.

And you're like, everybody just like, shut up.

This is where Moses is at right now.

He's frazzled.

He is, he's frustrated.

About to pull his hair out, maybe reach for a glass of wine.

I don't know.

And so Moses in Numbers 11, verse 16.

Moses is grumbling.

Verse 16.

Then the Lord said to Moses, gather for me 70 men of the elders of Israel, whom you know to be the elders of the people and officers over them, and bring them to the tent of meeting and let them take their stand there with you.

And I will come down and talk with you there.

And I will take some of the spirit that is on you and put it on them.

And they shall bear the burden of the people with you so that you may not bear it alone.

Pretty cool.

Moses is overwhelmed.

He's got too much going on.

He goes to God and says, mama.

He goes, hey.

And then God says to Moses, I'm going to put some of the spirits that's on you, on these 70 men, and they're going to help you and they're going to bear the burden of the people so that you do not bear it alone.

Okay, let's jump down to verse 26.

Numbers 11, 26.

Now two men remained in the camp, one named Eldad and the other named Medad.

Jordan, some pretty cool names.

I know you guys got a boy on the way.

Eldad, Eldad Spano.

That sounds pretty good.

Now two men remained in the camp, one named Eldad and the other named Medad.

And the spirit rested on them.

They were among those registered, but they had not gone out to the tent.

And so they prophesied in the camp.

And the young man ran and told Moses, Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp.

And Joshua, the son of Nun, the assistant of Moses from his youth said, my Lord, Moses, stop them.

But Moses said to him, are you jealous for my sake?

Would that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit on them.

Okay, so these two guys are prophesying.

And then Joshua, which this is like a cool little like moment where Joshua just kind of peeks in before he like becomes the next leader of Israel.

And so it's like a little cool like you're watching a movie and it's like, oh, oh, that guy was in the first scene and now he's in the last scene.

It's like anyways, so Joshua comes up to Moses and he's like, hey, make these guys stop.

And Moses says, Joshua, are you jealous of me?

I wish that all of the Lord's people would be filled with the spirit.

Why do I bring up this text?

Jesus is a greater Moses.

Jesus is the fulfillment of Moses.

And in this story, we see the spirit come upon these men to bear the burdens of the people with Moses.

Jesus is preparing these disciples for life after Jesus.

Life after Jesus has ascended.

And just as the spirit fell on these men to help Moses, Jesus is going to the Father to send the spirit to do the greater works through his disciples and all that would be filled with the spirit to come after them.

Moses gathers these 70 men.

God puts his spirit on these 70 men to bear the burden of the people.

Jesus came to earth.

Fulfilled Old Testament prophecy became our salvation, became our Savior, goes to heaven, sends down the spirit that we would bear the burden of the gospel mission, that we would be sent out to make disciples.

Jesus said to his disciples, my Father will give you another helper to be with you forever.

That word helper in the Greek is the word periklitos.

That word can either mean helper or advocate, right?

A periklit is a person who acts as a spokesperson or representative of someone else's policy, their someone else's purpose or someone else's cause, especially before a judge in court.

So if you had problems with the law and you needed somebody to represent you, you would call your periklit.

The prefix there, para, means alongside or beside, and the verb klitos means to call.

So the periklit was someone you called to come alongside you and help you in your defense.

That's what this helper is.

That's what this spirit is, alongside of us, helping us, protecting us, our advocate.

And as we close and we focused on the helper, we've talked about this advocate.

I want us to notice one more thing in the text.

Jesus says, another helper.

Jesus says, another helper, right?

I'm sending, the Father will send another helper.

First John 2, verse 1 says, I'm writing these things to you so that you may not sin.

But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate.

Just talking about that, the helper, the periklit.

We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous.

He is the propitiation for our sins and not for ours only, but also for the sin of the world.

Jesus is the original periklit.

Jesus is the first helper.

We would never get the spirit if we were not first helped by Jesus to take our sin, to take away our death.

Jesus is our advocate for our sin and death.

That while we were still sinners, Christ died for us and his death brings us to right standing with God.

Jesus is our helper and he has sent us another helper so that we might share the message of his love, his grace and mercy and kindness to not just to each other, but to our neighbors, to our co-workers, to our family, and to the whole world.

Jesus has sent us the helper, not so that we ourselves could be comforted by his spirit when we are in trouble, but he has sent us out on mission to go make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son and the Spirit, teaching them to observe everything I have commanded you to do.

That's the mission.

That's the greater works.

Let us not get lost in what we cannot do.

But what we can do is care for our neighbor.

What we can do is see the person who is homeless on the side of the street, maybe not hand them cash, but go out of your way to buy them a burger or a sandwich, whatever you're by.

It's going out of our way to see people who are on the outside when you're at that park and you see that person who's just standing there by themselves asking their name, taking time to see people and to not just be about self.

So usually when we talk about the Spirit, it's all the things that it does for us.

Well, we've been empowered with the Spirit to go, not to shelter and stay in place.

Would you pray with me?

Jesus, we thank you for your word.

We thank you that this was written down so that we could read it and see it and have your story before us.

Jesus, we thank you for the greater work that you have commissioned us and called us to do, to go and tell others of your message, of your good news.

Jesus, would you help us as we pray?

Thank you for your Spirit that indwells us, that is interpreting our prayers for us.

And Father, even the good things that we ask for, when they don't happen in our timing, when they don't happen our way, may we rejoice that you hear us and you know what's best for us.

Thank you, Jesus, that we can love you.

And it is through your love, through your love that we get to obey you.

And thank you for sending your Spirit.

Would your Spirit continue to help us to discern truth, help us to act and go and move like you would Jesus.

We love you.

We thank you for this morning.

And it's in Jesus' name, everyone said, Amen.
