---
layout: sermon
title: "John 9:1-41"
date: "2025-02-16T15:54:16.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/98626359/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-1-17%2F395035777-44100-2-a2eb57ca29448.m4a"
duration: "30:48"
scripture: "John 9:1-41"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>Jesus heals a blind man. </p>\n
guid: 749c2512-3568-4fd4-a8a6-d9726fcf5b3e
episode_id: 3cb40e99
---

## Transcription

All right, let's turn to John chapter 9.

We're gonna be reading the whole chapter today and I'll be teaching through the whole chapter today.

It's one whole story so I break it up just tackle it you know.

And as you're turning there to John chapter 9, I'm really excited for our first prayer and worship gathering that's happening in two weeks I believe if I am remembering correctly.

Yes the 26th.

I'm really looking forward to that.

I've been spending a lot of time praying, spending a lot of time reading and learning and I'm really looking forward to our time together that evening so be sure to put it in your calendar and do not miss it.

It's gonna be a great time for us to gather as a church and to really seek the Lord and it'll also yeah from that time I'm if not before then we will our Sunday morning prayer time will shift as well just yeah just all good things all good things better better prayer more scripture led prayer but that's for another time John 9 somebody wants to read.

As he passed by he saw a man blind from birth and his disciples asked him, Rabbi who sinned this man or his parents that he was born blind?

Jesus answered it was not that this man sinned or his parents but that the works of God might be displayed in him.

We must work the works we must work the works of him who sent me while at his day night is coming when no one can work.

As long as I am in the world I am the light of the world.

Having said these things he spit on the ground and made mud with the saliva.

Then he anointed the man's eyes with the mud and said to him go wash in the pools of Siloam which means scent.

So he went and washed and came back seeing.

The neighbors and those who had seen him before as a beggar were saying is this not the man who used to sit and beg?

Some said is he others said no but he is like him he kept saying I am the man.

So they said to him then how were your eyes opened?

He answered the man called Jesus made mud and anointed my eyes and said to me go to Siloam and wash.

So I went and washed and received my sight.

They said to him where is he?

He said I do not know.

They brought to the Pharisees the man who had formerly been blind.

Now it was a Sabbath day when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes.

So the Pharisees asked again asked him how he had received his sight and he said to them he put mud in my eyes and I washed and I see.

Some of the Pharisees said this man is not from God for he does not keep the Sabbath but others said how can a man who is a sinner do such signs?

And there was a division among them.

So they again they said again to the blind man what do you say about him since he has opened your eyes?

He said he is a prophet.

The Jews did not believe that he had been blind and had received sight until they called the parent so the man who had received his sight and asked them is this your son who you say was born blind?

How then does he now see?

His parents answered we know that this is our son and that he was born blind but how he sees we do not know nor do we know who opened his eyes.

Ask him he is of age he will speak for himself.

His parents said these things because they feared the Jews for the Jews had already agreed that if anyone should confess Jesus to be Christ he was to be put out of the synagogue.

Therefore his parents said he is of age ask him.

So for the second time they called the man who had been blind and said to him give glory to God we know that this man is a sinner.

He answered whether he is a sinner I do not know.

One thing I do know that though I was blind now I see.

They said to him what did he do to you?

How did he open your eyes?

He answered them I've told you already and you would not listen.

Why do you want to hear it again?

Do you also want to become his disciples?

And they reviled him saying you are his disciple but we are disciples of Moses.

We know that God has spoken to Moses but as for this man we do not know where he comes from.

The man answered why this is an amazing thing you do not know where he comes from and yet he opened my eyes.

We know that God does not listen to sinners but if anyone is a worshiper of God and does his will God listens to him.

Never since the world began has it been heard that anyone opened the eyes of a man born blind.

If this man were not from God he could do nothing.

They answered him you were born in utter sin and would you teach us and they cast him out.

Jesus heard that they had cast him out and having found him he said do you believe in the Son of Man?

He answered and who is he sir that I may believe in him?

Jesus said to him you have seen him and it is he who's speaking to you.

He said Lord I believe and he worshipped him.

Jesus said for judgment I came into this world that those who do not see may see and those who may and those who see may become blind.

Some of the Pharisees near him heard these things and said to him are we also blind?

Jesus said to them if you were blind you would have no guilt but now that you say we see your guilt remains.

Awesome.

Let me pray for us.

Jesus we thank you for your word.

May you speak to us this morning.

Jesus name, amen.

Okay let's jump back to the top here John chapter 9.

Quite truly kind of a funny story.

There's some good bits of humor in there at least I think so.

Verse 1 starts as he passed by he saw a man blind from birth and his disciples asked him Rabbi who sinned this man or his parents that he was born blind?

Jesus answered it was not that this man sinned or his parents but that the works of God might be displayed in him.

So this narrative really starts with an interesting question from the disciples who sinned the man or his parents and at the time it was believed that certain consequences would come from certain sin.

We could look to the book of Job and his friends coming to him and being like what have you done to dishonor God or to sin against God like look what he's done to you like what did you do you you had to have done something for him to act in this way.

Now under the New Covenant I do not think that there are grounds to believe this.

We do have certain natural consequences for our actions but to say God cursed you because you did something or because you sinned in some way I believe to be unbiblical.

I do believe in original sin that we are all born in sin due to Adam and we suffer in life because of sin.

There's sin in this world because of sin because of original sin but you do not necessarily get certain sufferings based on certain sins.

Anyways Jesus essentially says to this disciple you assuming correctly his blindness is not from sin but he is blind so that the work of God could be displayed.

Jesus continues verse 5, as long as I am in the world I am the light of the world.

Having said these things he spit on the ground made mud with saliva and then he anointed the man's eyes with the mud.

Why mud?

We don't exactly know why but there are a few different speculations that are worth bringing up.

The first is it's Sabbath and Jesus spitting in the dirt not actually him spitting but then him working the dirt to make mud that would be considered work and it's Sabbath.

So that's why later on in the verse we see this man is as sinned in the Sabbath.

The Sabbath verse I think is verse 16 which we'll get to later.

So the admittance of this very early on is sort of giving context to what's gonna happen later in the story.

That's probably the most likely.

Second another this is speculation but Jesus is using is using ordinary means for extraordinary purposes.

Jesus is using dirt and spit two things that are very ordinary very regular for extraordinary purposes.

Just like Jesus taking the bread and the cup on the night he was betrayed and using ordinary means bread and wine to display his extraordinary love and grace through communion and the New Covenant.

So that we might not just write off the ordinary things of this world as just worthless but that we would see God can use anything.

Verse 7 and he said to him go wash in the in the pool of Siloam which means sent.

So he went and washed and came back seeing.

He went and he washed and he came back seeing.

Could you imagine being this blind man you're like there doing your own thing begging and then this rabbi and his crew come up to you and someone in the crew goes hey rabbi who sinned this man or his parents and then you hear the rabbi go it was neither.

The reason he's blind is so that I can so that the works of God may be displayed through him and then you're blind you don't know what's happening you hear a voice and then you hear him hawk a loogie spit in the dirt and then you hear this like shuffling under you and then the man proceeds to put the dirt on your eyes like did he ask did he like this is this is crazy for the blind man and then after this he tells you go to the pool of Siloam and then you do it he went he washed and he received his sight.

That's crazy absolutely ridiculous I think the other crazy part is we don't get any news of his reaction right like we don't see him like jumping up and down or like looking at his hands and like looking at himself like I can see like we don't get any of this we just get the the reaction of the other people verse 8 the neighbors and those who had seen him before as a beggar were saying is this not the man who used to sit and beg some said it is he others said no but he is like him he kept saying I am the man so they said to him then how were your eyes opened he answered the man called Jesus made mud and anointed my eyes and said to me go to Siloam and wash so I went and washed and received my sight they said to him where is he he said I do not know I this is the second time we've sort of seen this phrase and we see it multiple times of I went and washed and received my sight man isn't that the gospel for us I was in sin I believed and I received my sight what a beautiful declaration of a believer I went and I washed and received my sight so beautiful and then someone had the brilliant idea to bring him to the Pharisees verse 13 they brought to the Pharisees the man who had formerly been blind the artist formerly known as Prince verse 14 now it was Sabbath day when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes so the Pharisees again asked him how he received his sight and he said to them he put mud on my eyes and I washed and I see some of the Pharisees said this man is not from God for he does not keep the Sabbath there it is we talked about that earlier but others said how can a man who is a sinner do such signs and there was a division among them so there's this division among the Pharisees on who Jesus is he is either not from God because he breaks the Sabbath he's a sinner or he is from God because a sinner cannot do such signs a sinner cannot make a man who was born blind see essentially what they are arguing is Jesus from God or is he the devil that's what they're arguing he the people who think he's a devil he breaks the law he's acting on demonic powers then the other people are arguing he surely has not sinned he must be from God and the Pharisees in the midst of their division in the midst of their arguing they turn to the formerly blind man and ask what say you blind man what is your what do you think of him and verse 17 so they said again to the blind man what do you say about him since he has opened your eyes the blind man says he is a prophet the Jews verse 18 the Jews did not believe that he had been blind and had received his sight until they called the parents of the man who had received sight so essentially the Pharisees turn to the blind man and go what do you think he's a prophet Pharisees go nope wrong answer bring in your parents we don't trust you you're a liar verse 19 they asked him they asked them is this your son who you say was born blind how then does he now see his parents answered we know that this is our son and that he was born blind but how he now sees we do not know nor do we know who opened his eyes ask him he is of age he will speak for himself his parents said these things because they feared the Jews for the Jews had already agreed that if anyone should confess Jesus to be Christ he was to be put out of the synagogue therefore his parents said he is of age ask him 24 so for the second time they called the man who had been blind and said to him give glory to God we know that this man is a sinner so they the Pharisees or the parents were not the witness that they were looking for they were looking for this man to be a liar saying he was blind but he actually wasn't blind and so they call the man back in again and they tell the man to give glory to God because Jesus is a sinner they're making these claims of Jesus to be a sinner and do they know for sure he is a sinner are they sure how sure are they verse 25 he answered whether he is a sinner I do not know one thing I do know that though I was blind now I see I love this declaration whether he is a sinner I do not know but one thing I do know this is a black church right now we'd have a praise break we go crazy we get back to it about ten minutes one thing I do know is I was blind but now I see hallelujah this is the work of God not just in this blind man but in all believers we were blind we were dead in our trespasses and Jesus walks by and says that this is so that the work of God might be displayed in you that you were blind but now you see that you were in death but now you have life that you were in darkness but now you see the light and I am the light of the world verse 26 they said to him what did he do to you how did he open your eyes he already answered them I have already told you and you would not listen why do you want to hear it again do you also want to become his disciples this guy's essentially going you're obsessed with my story like dude do you also want to like follow this man as well cuz like I'm trying to find him I don't know I don't know what he looks like I hadn't I wasn't given my sight yet I don't know the guy do you also want to become his disciples and they refiled him saying you are his disciple but we are disciples of Moses we know that God has spoken to Moses but as for this man we do not know where he comes from it's kind of funny especially thinking of chapter 8 when Jesus says before Abraham was I am and now we see the Pharisees again not deal with Abraham again they're talking about the law so of course they would think Moses before it was the lineage of the Jews and Abraham but it's interesting how John sort of is picking at taking these stories and picking at the patriarchs if you will or the the Mount Rushmore of the of the Jewish faith and going Jesus is greater than Abraham now there we see this comparison between Jesus and Moses just kind of funny how that's written out there anyways verse 30 the man answered why this is an amazing thing you do not know where he comes from and yet he opened my eyes we know that God does not listen to sinners but if anyone is a worshiper of God and does his will God listens to him never since the world began has it been heard that anyone open the eyes of a man born blind if this man were not from God he could do nothing so this man this formerly blind man starts sharing the good news right he's like I if you don't know where this man comes from and look what he's done to me like this is like amazing like surely this man has to be the Messiah if this man Jesus were not from God he could do nothing that's what this man is saying this man has to be from God the Pharisees did not like that that connection that correlation they didn't like that this man was clearly seeing the work of God happening in his life and the Pharisees replied you were born in utter sin and you would teach us and they cast him out we can see the pride of the Pharisees right they're going like you're a sinner how dare you try to teach us Pharisees about this man Jesus how dare you try to teach us and and tell me and tell us what who who this man is you were born in sin and they cast him out verse 35 Jesus heard that they had cast him out and having found him he said do you believe in the Son of Man he answered and who is he sir that I may believe in him Jesus said to him you have seen him and it is he who is speaking to you he said Lord I believe and he worshiped him this man although he is seeing with his eyes for the first time he is also seeing eternal life for the first time he is seeing the word for the first time he is seeing with for a better word his soul for the first time the response of the seeing the response of those who see is belief and worship the response of those who see Jesus as Lord is belief in him and worship him verse 39 for judgment I came into the world that those who do not see may see and those who see may become blind some of the Pharisees near him heard these things and said to him are we also blind Jesus said to them if you were blind you would have no guilt but now you say we see your guilt remains Jesus is making this really interesting I guess it's not too interesting because he's been kind of pulling on this thread for a while now of the Jews one having the revelation of Scripture having the Old Testament seeing prophecies seeing all these things then seeing the reality of Jesus and how they should be able to see that Jesus is the Messiah but they cannot they cannot come to grips with it they cannot believe they cannot work it out and we see some of these Pharisees say are we also blind and Jesus says if you were blind you would have no guilt but now that you say we see your guilt remains it reminds me of my all of my time in student ministry I would always get the question and it's a classic youth ministry question how far is too far especially it's February love month you know how far is too far but the thing is is that that question would be asked in multiple different ways not just exclusively about sex and dating but it would get asked multiple different ways in multiple different categories and obviously depending on circumstance I would answer the question differently but one of the ways I would answer that question is if you have to ask if the thing that you're wanting to do is right or wrong chances are it's probably wrong if you have to ask if it's right or wrong chances are it's probably wrong it's okay if I just smoke a little weed okay well what about my vape pen well what if I just what if I just try it once if if you have to ask if it's right or wrong chances are it's probably wrong should I take out the trash when my parents asked me to should I should I drive the speed limit right these these sort of questions very silly very stupid but when you are trying to reason with a high schooler you you kind of have to get there these Pharisees who heard Jesus and the blind man's conversation I think are asking a very similar question are we also blind and Jesus responds to them again saying if you were blind you would have no guilt but now that you say we see your guilt remains they knew they could see Jesus but yet and they then of course with Jesus response now they know they're in the wrong but they didn't do anything about it which I guess is wrong they eventually will do something about killed Jesus but I think this is the struggle for the believer who grew up in church who grew up seeing who grew up knowing Jesus then life happens you stray away from the faith you went and did your own thing you lived out in the world you for periods of time and just like the lovely prodigal son you find your way back home this is the struggle for a person if that if that's your character arc if you will this is the struggle for the person I think I could see the Pharisees there right there who were who asked this question to Jesus guilt that's the struggle for the person who knew Jesus who knew life who knew who knew the answer and yet you did your own thing you you didn't follow the the truth and it's guilt you were in the wrong you knew you were sinning but you did it anyways and the enemy would love nothing more than to keep you there then to keep you in that place of of guilt and you cannot change what you have done but if you are redeemed remember the blood of Jesus covers your sin whether you knew it was sin or not now of course should we go on sinning no but just as said in John chapter 8 if the Sun set you free you are free indeed put the chains down Jesus already unlock them you do not need to hold on to guilt or shame anymore Jesus already freed you be like the formerly blind man believe and worship Jesus believe and worship Jesus worship with your whole heart not just worship in a song but worship with our whole lives let us love the Lord our God with all our heart soul mind and strength and love our neighbor as ourself that's how we glorify God that's how we believe and worship him let me close in prayer Jesus we thank you for who you are we thank you God that you are good we thank you for sending your son Jesus so that we could see so that we could see you as light of the world so we could see you as as holy we could see you as our Savior father for those of us who might struggle with the guilt of sins past father would you help us to let those go because we're holding on to things that have already been forgiven we're holding on to things that have already been paid for holding on to things that have already been bought by your blood so help us to walk and know that we are free because of your blood because of your sacrifice God we thank you for your scriptures this book specifically that keeps calling us back to belief in you Jesus Jesus you change everything let us believe it and let us rest in your finished work on the cross that it has justified us that it had that it has made us right with you father and that from there you sanctify us you change us from the inside out thank you father for all that you've done and all that you are doing we worship you and it's in Jesus name everyone said amen
