---
layout: sermon
title: "John 19:17-37"
date: "2025-08-17T16:49:57.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/106977755/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-7-17%2F405806672-44100-2-28d0d2bd0c274.m4a"
duration: "44:05"
scripture: "John 19:17-37"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>The crucifixion of Jesus Christ. </p>

guid: 54faca99-4da1-4e33-9ccc-d78fa5cbab0e
episode_id: b9f298ff
---

## Transcription

This morning we are looking at the crucifixion of our Lord and there's so many ways to go about that, specifically with this passage of scripture.

We could, there's a couple different ways we could do, we could kind of look at all the different gospels and kind of compare and contrast and sort of get this mosaic or this full picture of what we see from the crucifixion.

That's one way to do it.

But this morning I'm going to try my very best just to stick to John's account.

I'm just going to try my best to stick in the gospel of John.

Why?

Because he wrote this letter for a purpose and with intent, not only from the inspiration of the Spirit and his eyewitness account, but also with his unique perspective.

So I want us to quickly jump to John 1 verse 1 and get reacquainted with the prologue, kind of see, again this was kind of the whole reason, the whole point.

John wrote this story and he's been pulling on these themes that he's been talking about since John 1, 1.

And so now before we read the crucifixion and all that, I just want us to read John 1, 1 and I'll just, I'll read it aloud and you can follow along.

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God and the Word was God.

He was in the beginning with God.

All things were made through him and without him was not anything made that was made.

In him was life and the life was the light of men.

The light shines in the darkness and the darkness has not overcome it.

There was a man sent from God whose name was John.

He came as a witness to bear witness about the light that all might believe through him.

He was not the light, but he came to bear witness about the light.

The true light, which gives light to everyone, was coming into the world.

He was in the world and the world was made through him, yet the world did not know him.

He came to his own and his own people did not receive him, but to all who did receive him, who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God who were born not of blood nor of the will of the flesh nor of the will of man, but of God.

And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us and we have seen his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth.

John bore witness about him and cried out, This was he of whom I said, He who comes after me wrings before me, because he was before me.

For from the fullness we have all received grace upon grace, for the law was given through Moses, grace and truth came through Christ.

No one has ever seen God, the only God who is at the Father's side.

He has made him known.

Okay, now let's turn back to John chapter 19 verse 17 and 37.

I got a lot to get through today so I'm just going to read it myself.

And so better luck next time.

We'll start at verse 17, 16B, whatever.

So they took Jesus and he went out bearing his own cross to the place called the place of a school, which in Aramaic is called Golgotha.

There they crucified him and him with two others, one on either side and Jesus between them.

Pilate also wrote an inscription and put it on the cross.

It read Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.

Many of the Jews read this inscription for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city and it was written in Aramaic, in Latin and in Greek.

So the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, Do not write the King of the Jews, but rather this man said, I am the King of the Jews.

Pilate answered, What I have written, I have written.

When the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his garments and divided it, divided them into four parts.

One part for each soldier, also his tunic.

But the tunic was seamless, woven in one piece from top to bottom.

So they said to one another, let us not tear it, but cast lots for it to see whose it shall be.

This was to fulfill the scripture which says they divided my garments among them for my clothing they cast lots.

So the soldiers did these things, but standing by the cross of Jesus were his mother and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas and Mary Magdalene.

When Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, Woman, behold your son.

Then he said to the disciple, Behold your mother.

And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home.

After this, Jesus knowing that all was now finished, said to fulfill the scripture, I thirst.

A jar full of sour wine stood there.

So they put a sponge full of the sour wine on his branch and held it to his mouth.

When Jesus had received the sour wine, he said, It is finished.

And he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.

Since it was the day of preparation, and so that the bodies would not remain on the cross on the Sabbath, for that Sabbath was a high day, the Jews asked Pilate that their legs might be broken and that they might be taken away.

So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and of the other who had been crucified with him.

But when they came to Jesus, they saw came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead.

They did not break his legs.

But one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear and at once there came out blood and water.

He who saw it has borne witness.

His testimony is true and he knows that he is telling the truth that you also may believe for these things took place that the scripture might be fulfilled.

Not one of his bones will be broken.

And again, another scripture says they will look on him whom they have pierced.

So this morning, like I said, we're looking at the story of the crucifixion.

And another reason I want to try to stick to John's gospel is because he quotes so many Old Testament passages and all over this text.

And of course, in our Bibles with all these verses and paragraph breaks and subheadings that we get in our Bibles, again, these were not in the original text, so they broke up verse 16 and 17 with a new paragraph.

So let's read that again from the top.

Verse 16 says, So he, Pilate, delivered him over to them to be crucified.

So they took Jesus and he went out bearing his own cross to the place called the place of the skull, which in Aramaic is called Golgotha.

There they crucified him and with two others, one on either side, Jesus between them.

So Pilate delivered Jesus over to the Jews to be crucified?

No, because the Jews did not have the authority to kill or the authority to crucify.

So John is probably making the point that Pilate gave Jesus to the Roman soldiers.

We talked about last week the potential possibility for Jesus being beaten and flogged, as it says in verse 1 of chapter 19, twice.

And under that assumption, this would have been the turning point for that worst punishment or that second beating and scourging to begin, which then would end with the crucifixion.

And Jesus walking his cross from the praetorium where Pilate was to which some point along the way, the other gospels, look I already did it, the other gospels tell us that Simon of Cyrene, he carried the cross for Jesus.

Is this a conflict of testimony because John here says that he went out bearing his own cross?

I don't think so.

He probably left the praetorium, Jesus left the praetorium with the cross on his back.

Mark, I believe, tells us that Simon of Cyrene was found walking into the temple gate, so Jesus probably made it to the temple gate.

They see this guy walking in, walking by, hey you, Jesus falls.

We know that from the other gospel accounts, Jesus falls and they pick this man, hey you carry his cross.

And so it's probably just different timelines.

Okay, let's take a moment to talk about the part of the cross Jesus was carrying.

It was customary in crucifixion that the person being crucified would carry the cross beam.

So of course we all know what a cross looks like.

You know, you've got the vertical beam here.

I look like a three year old.

And then the horizontal beam here.

That's terrific.

And so crucifixion happened semi-frequently.

Chances are the big pieces of wood that they used would have been reused.

It wasn't like a one use only.

So again we have to think Jesus is probably on a cross that other people have used.

And so they would just carry, again from the judgment seat, whoever was in charge, they would carry that person or they would take, that person would take the horizontal cross beam.

They would take this cross beam here and then they would go to the place where the vertical cross beam was already stuck into the ground.

So what, of course they carry that cross beam, that horizontal cross beam and they're carrying that big piece of wood.

Then they would get to the vertical cross beam.

They would lay these people on the ground.

They would take five to seven inch nails and drive them most likely through the wrist here because the bones are pretty brittle here in the hand.

And you've got two strong bones here that meet at your wrist.

And so they would drive the nails through the portion of the wrist here.

And in doing so, not only would that be incredibly painful, but also it would hit nerves, some main nerves that would go through your arm here.

And you would feel the best sort of analogy that I've heard is like hitting your funny bone, but not just hitting your funny bone, but somebody taking a pair of pliers and squeezing your funny bone.

And it was just incredibly painful and you would feel that, of course, all through your arms and your hands.

And then Jesus would be hoisted up onto the vertical cross beam and this would stretch out his arms up to six inches.

And so your shoulders could very well become dislocated in the midst of this.

And then once you are up on the cross, it is a very slow death.

That was kind of the whole point of the crucifixion.

It was not to be an electrical chair, kind of quick and easy.

It would be prolonged death.

Later in the scripture that we read, it talks about them breaking the legs.

And that was out of mercy.

That was out of, we'll get to that later.

But anyways, so they're on these vertical beams.

And then, of course, we know that there were nails driven into the wrists here.

Oh, that's an eraser.

Oh, that actually works kind of well.

So you got nails in the wrists here and then they would put nails, of course, through their heels and in their feet and there would be a little block that's placed around their feet here that the nails get driven into.

And so that the legs would have, or your feet would have something to rest onto.

That's not to be nice.

They weren't doing that to be like merciful.

They were doing that so that, because what would happen is you would be on the cross here and it would take your body into an inhale position.

And then to exhale, you have to push up with your feet, which then, of course, you have nails in your feet.

So that wouldn't feel very good.

And you're pushing up off of that block to exhale, to give your chest a break.

And then you go through it again.

And so it's just kind of this repeated cycle.

And not only that, but usually you're beaten and whipped before.

And so your body is, your beaten and whipped body that's already broken is scraping up against this.

This is not a finely planed piece of wood and sanded and stained like we usually see.

It would have been rough.

It would have been, so now your back, your shoulders, your head is all scraping along this rough wood.

And so it would have been a slow, humiliating, torturous death.

And in verse 19 it tells us that Pilate also wrote an inscription and put it on the cross.

This was very customary that they would put the reason why the person is accused and is worthy of this death of the cross.

And so Pilate writes, Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.

And these Jews, they did not like that Pilate wrote that.

And they write it in Aramaic, in Latin, and in Greek.

So in all of the languages of all the people who would have been around, they would have been able to read that Jesus of Nazareth is the King of the Jews.

And the chief priests get upset and they say, this man said he is the King of the Jews.

And it seems like Pilate is maybe taking an opportunity here to mock the Jews.

He's taking this time to mock their allegiance to Caesar.

Just moments ago they said, our only King is Caesar.

Like, you're with, if you don't do this, you're against Caesar is what they said to Pilate.

And Pilate says, yeah that was cute, but what I have written I have written.

Or in other words, it is what it is.

I said what I said.

Whatever the actual intent was for Pilate, it was at service to God's purposes.

The Lord Jesus is indeed the King of the Jews.

But not just the King of the Jews, but the King of Kings.

And the cross is the means of his exaltation and the manner for his glorification.

F.

F.

Bruce, a British theologian who died in 1990 said this.

The crucified one is the true King, the kingliest King of all.

Because it is he who is stretched on the cross, he turns an obscene instrument of torture into a throne of glory, and he reigns from the tree.

Verse 23 continues, when the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his garments and divided them into four parts.

One part for each soldier.

Also his tunic, but the tunic was seamless, woven in one piece from top to bottom.

So they said to another, let us not tear it, but cast lots for it to see whose it shall be.

This was to fulfill scripture which says, they divided my garments among them, and for my clothing they cast lots.

So there's a few ways we could read this text.

And the way I take this portion is, Jesus probably had five pieces of clothing.

Right, so they took the garments and divided them into four parts, plus, oh, and also his tunic.

So if we look at sort of the common wardrobe of the time, the common attire for men at What we will see is, they had an undergarment layer which is his tunic, and then what usually would happen is there would be a robe over that, that would be kind of the overgarment, and then there is a belt and sandals, and usually a head covering.

Ladies, where are your head coverings?

So when we kind of see there's five pieces, divide them into four parts, okay, so there's four parts there, one part for each of the soldiers, right, so one soldier got a robe, one soldier got a belt, one soldier got a sandal, one soldier got the head covering, and then they probably cast lots for the seamless tunic.

So then one person gets the next piece of clothing.

Again, if, and that is to fulfill Psalm 22, Psalm 22 verse 18, that's where we get that passage there, of they divided my garments among them, and for my clothing they cast lots, and if we were to look at the other gospels which were not, we would see one of the sayings of Jesus that he says upon the cross is, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me, which is also from Psalm 22 verse 1, and so John probably heard Jesus say, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me, Psalm 22, then he sees these Roman soldiers, and if John was a good Jew they would have had this scripture memorized as they had a plethora of Old Testament passages memorized, and so he probably sees them casting lots and is going like, kind of mind blown situation, like, whoa, what's happening here.

So the soldiers did these things, but standing at the cross of Jesus were his mother and his mother's sister, Mary, the wife of Clopas, Mary Magdalene.

When Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, woman, behold your son, and then he said to the disciple, behold your mother, and from that hour the disciple took her to his own home.

Again, depending on how you read this, there could be three or four women here, right?

So we have Mother Mary and his mother's sister is his mother's sister Mary, the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene, which would make three people, or it could be four, because chances are Mary's sister is probably not named Mary, right?

It says Mary, the wife of Clopas.

Is that his mother's sister?

I don't know.

So it's probably four women.

Mary did you know?

Which Mary did you know?

Jesus looks at John, the disciple whom he loved, which most of the times when, I feel like in the 21st century, actually, yeah, I feel like most times when we read John say the disciple whom he loved, we kind of like go, oh John, look at him, but I want to push back on that and like just think for a moment.

How would that change your mind, your perspective, your worth, your value if when you describe yourself, you described yourself as the one in whom Jesus loved?

Because newsflash, you are.

And so John describes himself as the disciple in whom Jesus loved, and he's standing by Jesus' mother, and Jesus says to his mom, he goes, mom, look, your new son.

And then he says to John, John, look, your new mom.

And this is the beautiful thing about the Kingdom of God.

I love my family.

I love my extended family, and I do not want to neglect my family, but my allegiance is to Jesus and His Kingdom.

And that means I've got so many other brothers and sisters and aunties and uncles and mamas and papas and gg's and riri's and raras and papas and mamas.

We have a great big family.

Paul will tell us in Galatians, for as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ, there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is no male or female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus.

And if you are Christ, then you are Abraham's offspring, heirs according to the promise.

In other words, we are family.

But what does that mean for us as a church?

That means we welcome anyone and everyone who wants to hear the gospel along with us.

Regardless of looks, regardless of status, we welcome anyone.

A video popped up on my YouTube algorithm the other day, and it was this man who was not himself homeless, but he is a veteran.

And he goes around, he lives in Florida, and he goes around his town and stands in front of public places and holds a sign that says, God bless homeless veterans.

Or on the flip side it says, pray for our homeless veterans.

And the video I saw, he was actually standing in front of a church and he was holding a sign that says, God bless homeless veterans, pray for homeless veterans.

And I was pretty encouraged to see some of how the members treated this man, of how when they were driving into church they might pull over, or when they were leaving church they might pull over and roll down the window and say, hey, how you doing?

You need anything?

They were caring for him very well.

But there were a few people who I think were either on staff or worked at the church, and the way that they treated this man was so disgusting.

Hey, we really don't want this outside of our church.

We really don't want these signs, we really don't want you holding this sign outside of our church.

We just don't like the look that it gives.

I'm sorry, what?

I thought the church is supposed to be a hospital for the sick.

I thought we're all worthy of hearing the gospel message.

I thought we're supposed to go into the world and tell of this message.

And even in fact, in one of the times some of the church staff got the police who were outside of the church to go and talk to this guy.

They wouldn't even go themselves.

It reminds me of how Jesus would hang out with the prostitutes and the tax collectors and how the religious elite, how that made them feel.

They were turned off, they were disgusted because Jesus was hanging out with those who are unclean.

I wonder if that man was standing outside of our church, I wonder how we would pass that test.

Would we kind of drive by and not tell anyone that we're on our way to church down the street?

Would we take a moment, pull over?

Hey, you need anything?

You need a bottle of water?

You need a coffee?

You need some donuts?

We're on our way to church, we can grab you something.

You need anything?

Would we be willing to be interrupted on our way to worship knowing that the interruption could turn into a form of worship towards God.

So, what does John say he did with Jesus' mom?

Nice.

And from that hour, the disciple took her to his own home.

He cared for her.

We must be people who care for people.

You guys do this so well, so I don't need to belabor the point.

After this, Jesus, knowing that all was now finished, said to fulfill the scriptures, I thirst.

A jar full of sour wine stood there, so they put a sponge full of the sour wine on a hyssop branch and held it to his mouth.

When Jesus had received the sour wine, he said, it is finished.

He bowed up and he gave his spirit.

So Jesus is scourged, he's bleeding and he's hanging on the cross under the sun in the Middle East.

Chances are he is probably literally dehydrated and thirsty, but Jesus is also steeped in the scripture and understands the moment that he is in and quotes another Psalm, Psalm 69, 21, they gave me poison for food and for my thirst they gave me sour wine to drink.

So the soldiers give Jesus the sour wine and he cries out, it is finished.

And he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.

Jesus is dead.

It is finished.

It is done.

Since it was the day of preparation and so that the bodies would not remain on the cross on the Sabbath, for that Sabbath was a high day, the Jews asked Pilate that their legs might be broken and that they might be taken away.

So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and of the other who had been crucified with him.

But when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs, but one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear and at once there came out blood and water.

Okay, we mentioned earlier how the Romans would essentially put a little foot rest on the vertical cross beam.

This would be the anchor that the criminal would leverage to push their body up to take a breath so that the crucifixion would take hours and sometimes days to prolong the suffering of the person.

And the Jews are trying to get home for Passover.

We talked about that a few weeks ago.

They are on their way trying to get home for Passover.

So they asked the Romans to break their legs so that the hanging criminals would just asphyxiate and would die and to quicken the process so that they could be home for Passover and also not to defile Passover.

So they break these guys' legs who are next to Jesus and then they get to Jesus and they see he's already dead and they pierce his side and water and blood comes out.

And now John sort of breaks the fourth wall and says, John breaks out of the storyline and says, I saw it, I witnessed it, my testimony is true, I know that I am telling the truth.

The Word became flesh and dwelt among us and we have seen his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth.

And John says, I'm telling you the truth so that you might believe.

For these things took place that the Scripture might be fulfilled, not one of his bones.

Will be broken and again another Scripture says, They will look on him whom they have pierced.

Okay, so John is back quoting Old Testament passages, specifically Exodus 12 and Numbers 9 and verse 36, not one of his bones will be broken.

And this is in context to the Passover lamb that they would not break the bones of the lamb.

Of course to kill the Passover lamb, the skin had to be broken.

Some people might ask, well we say that it's his body broken for us when we receive communion.

That's what Paul writes in 1 Corinthians 11, that it was Jesus' body broken for us.

Think of all the lashes, the thorns in his head.

His skin was broken but no bones were broken.

So that's just one little clarity there.

And of course, again, in context to the Passover lambs, their skin was broken for the sacrifice.

And then in Zechariah 12, 10 is what we get in verse 37.

And in context of the prophecy in Zechariah, God speaks after the defeat of the Gentile nations who have taken over Jerusalem and at the end time Zechariah says, And I will pour out, again this prophecy, I will pour out on the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem a spirit of grace and please for mercy so that when they look on me, on him whom they have pierced, they shall mourn for him as one mourns for an only child and weeps bitterly over him as one weeps over a firstborn.

So in context to the prophecy, New Testament, and as we read this as New Testament Christians, it is the weeping here would be Jews who pierced Jesus and have turned from Jesus and at the end times they will weep bitterly over Jesus.

They missed him.

But as we close this morning, I want to end with asking a asking and answering this question.

What is finished?

What is finished?

Jesus final words before he gives up his spirit were, it is finished.

So what is finished?

We hear that all the time.

We say it.

I think it was in a couple songs this morning.

Talking about it is finished.

So what is finished?

And we would get some great answers and we get great answers if we were to look over our catechism.

Not this week, but specifically questions 26 and 27 if you want to look that up.

You get some great answers there as well as the confession that we use, the Second London Baptist Confession of 1689 which has great questions and answers for this question of what is finished and those are great because they actually use scripture to answer those questions and so that's a little hack for you.

If you have a question on core belief, you can go to our catechism, you can go to the Second London Baptist Confession of 1689 and you can find answers to your questions there because it points you specifically to scripture.

And so this morning we're answering what is finished.

Let's look at scripture.

I've got to do this in two minutes.

Great.

Hebrews 9, but when Christ appeared as a high priest of the good things that have come, then through the greater and more perfect tent, not made with hands, that is not of this creation, he entered once for all into the holy places, not by means of the blood of goats and calves, but by means of his own blood, thus securing an eternal redemption.

For if the blood of goats and bulls and the sprinkling of defiled persons with the ashes of a heifer sanctify for the purification of the flesh, how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offer himself without blemish to God, purify our conscience from dead works to serve the living God?

Therefore he is the mediator of a new covenant so that those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance since a death has occurred that redeems them from the transgressions committed under the first covenant.

A lot of words there.

The author of Hebrews is describing how the high priest gets into the holy place of the temple and then he says in verse 12, that Jesus entered once for all into the holy place, not by the means of the blood of goats and of calves, but by his own blood.

So Jesus did not sacrifice an animal because an animal sacrifice, the blood of animals would only go so far, but his own blood, his own blood, secures eternal redemption.

Human imperfection for human imperfection.

For if the blood of bull and goats and the sprinkling of defiled persons with the ashes of a heifer sanctify for the purification of the flesh, so there's a temporary purification, how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purify our conscience from the dead works and service of the living God.

Again, the blood of animals could only go so far, but the blood of Christ, who lived without blemish, he purifies us from our dead works to serve the living God.

Therefore, or because of this, because Jesus did that, because it is finished, those who are called may receive the promise.

Those who are called, because Jesus did that, because he is our mediator, those who are called receive the promised eternal inheritance.

And this is the new covenant, since his death has occurred, that redeems from the sins committed under the first covenant.

So what is finished?

Let's put it in a nice little paragraph.

Jesus' sacrifice makes it possible for those who are called to receive the promised internal inheritance, eternal life.

So the shedding of his blood ushers in the new covenant with its promise of a once for all and decisive forgiveness of sins.

What is finished?

This is finished.

Jesus' sacrifice makes it possible for those who are called to receive the promised eternal inheritance, which is eternal life.

And so the shedding of his blood ushers in the new covenant with its promise of a once and for all sacrifice and the forgiveness of sins.

So what are we going to do about it?

We're finishing up here.

So what are we going to do about it?

I'm glad you asked.

Hebrews 10, 19.

So since it is finished, since Jesus did all this for us, what are we going to do about it?

Well, the writer of Hebrews tells us to draw near to God.

Draw near.

Let us draw near with a heart full of faith.

Draw near, full of faith and confidence.

Why?

Because we didn't earn it.

We didn't have to.

Who opened the way for us?

By the new living way that he opened for us through the curtain that is his flesh.

Because of what Jesus did for us, we can draw near to God with confidence, full of faith.

Why?

Because we are clean, not by our works, but through Christ's works.

We can draw near to God full of faith.

We can have confidence to enter the holy place.

We can draw near to God where God is full of faith.

What else does the author of Hebrews tell us to do?

We can hold fast to hope.

Hold fast to hope.

He is faithful.

We don't have to doubt if we are saved.

We can hold fast to the hope of our salvation.

Again, not by what we have done, but by what he has done.

It is finished, remember?

It is finished.

So we can hold fast to the hope of Jesus because he is faithful.

Even when we are faithless, it is a finished work.

So we can draw near to God.

We can hold fast to hope.

And then what else does it tell us?

To stir up one another to love and good works.

Stir up one another to love and good works.

What does that mean?

We need to encourage one another in the gospel.

Why?

Because how quick do we forget?

We don't have to go far to look in the scriptures to see how quickly the Israelites forgot.

To see how quickly the Israelites grew weary.

See how quickly the Israelites messed up, made mistakes, all those things.

Not saying we are not going to make mistakes.

We are.

But why is it important for us to meet together?

So that we can remember Jesus.

So that we can help one another draw near.

We can help one another hold fast to hope.

We can encourage one another.

When times get tough, when you are discouraged, when you are at the end of your rope, we get around each other so we can help one another draw near to God to hold fast to hope because we cannot do it alone.

So because it is finished, what is our response?

What do we do?

We draw near to God.

We hold fast to the hope that is in our salvation.

And again, we encourage one another to love and good works.

We cannot do it alone.

We need each other.

We need one another.

Of course, we need Christ, his example, his gospel.

None of this is possible without it.

So what is finished?

Jesus' sacrifice makes it possible for those who are called to receive eternal life.

So the shedding of his blood ushers in the new covenant with its promise of his once and for all sacrifice which is decisive for the forgiveness of sins.

And what do we do about it?

We draw near to God with confidence.

We can approach God with confidence knowing that Jesus' finished work is over us.

We can hold fast to hope with the assurance of his faithfulness, not our own.

And again, we can encourage one another to love and good works.

Let me pray for us.

Father, we thank you for this morning.

We thank you for your finished work.

We thank you that you are faithful when we are faithless.

We thank you that we can draw near to you full of faith and confidence.

Why?

Because of what you have done.

We can hold fast to the hope that is salvation because you are faithful when we are faithless.

It is a finished work.

Help us to stir one another up with love and good works, encouraging one another, pushing each other, helping each other, holding each other accountable so that we can all bring each other up towards love and good works.

We thank you Father for your work and we thank you for the work that you have invited us into.

We love you and we praise you and it's in Jesus' name everyone said.

Amen.
