---
layout: sermon
title: "John 15:1-10"
date: "2025-06-01T17:50:28.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/103510952/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-5-1%2F401383899-44100-2-9b0fba8088f84.m4a"
duration: "31:38"
scripture: "John 15:1-10"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>Jesus is the true vine. </p>\n
guid: ed043481-bc81-4948-b94c-16cc1894d34a
episode_id: 0a1d4c96
---

## Transcription

This morning we are jumping into John chapter 15, starting a new chapter.

Why don't we take a minute this morning and read through all of John 15.

And then we will be specifically looking at verses 1 through 10 this morning.

But let's read the whole chapter and take it from there.

I am the vine, you are the branches.

Whoever abides in me and I in him, he it is that bears much fruit.

For apart from me you can do nothing.

If anyone does not abide in me, he is thrown away like a branch in withers.

And the branches are gathered, thrown into the fire and burned.

If you abide in me and my words abide in you, ask whatever you wish and it will be done for you.

By this my Father is glorified that you bear much fruit and so prove to be my disciples.

As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you.

Abide in my love.

If you keep my commandments, you will abide in my love, just as I have kept my Father's commandments and abide in his love.

These things I have spoken to you that my joy may be in you and that your joy may be full.

This is my commandment, that you love one another as I have loved you.

Greater love has no one than this, that someone lay down his life for his friends.

You are my friends if you do what I command you.

No longer do I call you servants, for the servant does not know what his master is doing.

But I have called you friends.

For all that I have heard from my Father, I have made known to you.

You did not choose me, but I choose you and appointed you that you should go and bear fruit and that your fruit should abide.

So that whatever you ask the Father in my name, he may give it to you.

These things I command you, so that you will love one another.

If the world hates you, know that it has hated me before it hated you.

If you were of this world, the world would love you as its own.

But because you were not of this world, but I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.

Remember the word that I said to you, a servant is not greater than his master.

If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you.

If they kept my word, they will also keep yours.

But all these things they will do to you on account of my name, because they do not know him who sent me.

If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have been guilty of sin.

But now they have no excuse for their sin.

Whoever hates me hates the Father also.

If I had not done among them the works that no one else did, they would not be guilty of sin.

But now they have seen and hated both me and my Father.

But the word that is written in their law must be fulfilled.

They hated me without a cause.

But when the Helper comes, whom I will send from the Father, the Spirit of Truth, who proceeds from the Father, he will bear witness about me.

And you also will bear witness because you have been with me from the beginning.

Awesome.

Before we dive in, if you have your paper Bible with you, go ahead and put a finger in Isaiah chapter 5, because we are very quickly going to turn there.

And right at verse 1, Jesus says, I am the true vine.

And my Father is the vine dresser.

And if we were good Jews, we would know that this vineyard motif, this vine expression is used heavily throughout the Old Testament.

And usually when it's used, it's in reference to Israel.

And usually when it's used in reference to Israel, it's always negative.

So I want us to turn there and read this in Isaiah chapter 5, just verses 1 through 7.

But I want you to see it because we're going to spend a few minutes in here.

And so Isaiah chapter 5 verses 1 through 7 and the subheading in my Bible says, the vineyard of the Lord destroyed.

So remember, it's usually always in a negative sense.

Let me sing for my beloved, my love concerning his vineyard.

My beloved had a vineyard on a very fertile hill.

He dug it and cleared it out of stones and planted it with choice vines.

He built a watchtower in the midst of it and hoed out a wine vat in it.

He looked for it to yield grapes, but it yielded wild grapes.

And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, judge between me and my vineyard.

What more was there to do for my vineyard that I have not done in it?

When I look for it to yield grapes, why did it yield wild grapes?

And now I tell you what I will do to my vineyard.

I will remove its hedge and it shall be devoured.

I will break down its wall.

It shall be trampled down.

I will make it a waste.

It shall not be pruned or hoed and briars and thorns shall grow up.

I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.

For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel and the men of Judah are his pleasant planting.

And he looked for justice, but behold bloodshed.

For righteousness, but behold an outcry.

Pretty harsh words there.

Let's break it down so we can kind of have this understanding of this vineyard motif.

So it says there that the choice vines are Israel, right?

And the writer says, my beloved had a vineyard on a very fertile hill.

So it should have produced good fruit, right?

It's a fertile hill.

Verse 2, he dug it out and cleared it of stones and he planted it with choice vines.

Right?

Choice vines.

And we know that choice vines are Israel because at verse 7, right?

It says for the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel and the men of Judah.

So there's no confusion of who this is talking to, of who this is addressing.

The vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel and the men of Judah.

So God planted Israel as choice vines.

These were the good stuff.

This was the burgundy.

But they did not produce good fruit.

They produced wild grapes.

It's the end of verse 2.

They produced wild grapes.

So it was not the fruit that Jesus or that God was looking for.

These grapes were not what God wanted.

What God desired for his people, verse 7, was for justice but behold bloodshed.

Not justice.

God desired righteousness but behold an outcry.

So these grapes were not producing what God desired.

So what does God do?

Verse 5 tells us God will remove its hedge.

It shall be devoured.

God will break down its wall.

It shall be trampled down.

God will make it a waste.

That's not good for Israel.

And then what does Jesus say as we turn back to John chapter 15?

What does Jesus say to his disciples?

John chapter 15 verse 1, I am the true vine.

Israel was the choice vine.

Jesus is the true vine.

Jesus fulfilled what Israel could not do.

Jesus fulfilled what Israel could not.

Jesus is justice.

In fact Jesus is our justice.

Jesus is righteousness.

Jesus is our righteousness.

So Jesus says, again, I am the true vine.

Not the choice vine that produced wild grapes.

No, I am the true vine.

So I'm sure you can imagine in that room, but also could you imagine the first readers of this who were Israelites.

Just shortly after Jesus' death, burial, resurrection, John finally compiles this book.

It starts going around.

Then finally they get to hear Jesus is the true vine.

And his father is the vine dresser.

Every branch in me that does not bear fruit, he takes away.

And every branch that does bear fruit, he prunes that it may bear more fruit.

So this sermon we're going all in and then the ending is a little softer.

So bear with me here.

Because we're going to dive into the original language of the text because verse two is actually a play on words in Greek.

So Jesus said that those who do not bear fruit receive from God, ero is the Greek word, ero, which means to be cut off.

Or in the ESV it says takes away.

And everyone who does bear fruit receives kathero.

So you see that ero, kathero.

It's sort of this kind of play on words and kathero, which is translated in our Bible as prunes.

And so you've got this ero and kathero.

These two words that sound very similar like so you can kind of hear the play on words there.

And that's kind of difficult to translate into English.

But the word, we get our word katharsis from the word kathero, which the meaning of katharsis is like purification or cleansing.

So what Jesus is essentially saying here is those who are in me and do not bear fruit are cut off.

And those who do bear fruit are cleansed.

They're purified.

They're nurtured and pruned so that they bear even more fruit.

They become even more productive.

And remember, this is this is a metaphor.

And in this metaphor, in this vineyard, the vine dresser, God, will walk through the vineyard and trim off the branches that are not producing.

And he is also pruning the healthy vines so that they can produce the best fruit.

Right.

Why do you you prune those that are that are not producing fruit so that the the vine isn't wasting energy on that?

On on on worthless things and you want it pruned back so produces more produces better.

What up?

What did God we serve?

So he loves us enough to not only give us salvation, but he cares for us enough to prune us so that we can produce a great fruit.

And as Jesus said in this text, we can do none of this without him.

We can do none of this without Jesus.

None of this is possible without Jesus.

Without him, we are useless.

Where does a branch?

Right.

Jesus is the vine.

We are the branches.

Where does a branch get its nutrients from the vine?

A branch gets its nutrients and life from the vine.

And the church said, Amen.

As I just said, this is a metaphor.

And when we're looking at metaphors, if we push them to the extreme, sometimes we could come up against some challenging lines of question or some dangerous territory, if you will.

And one of the problems we get right away in this metaphor is it can seem to say that the people who are truly Christian can lose their salvation.

Right.

Because it says the text says every branch in me that does not bear fruit is cut off.

So can you be can you become a branch of the vine?

Right.

Jesus is the vine.

We are the branches.

Can you become a branch of the vine only to be cut off later and thrown into the fire?

Let's answer this question with scripture.

Allow scripture to interpret scripture.

So John Wool show us in Chapter 17.

It's called the subheading.

There is Jesus's high priestly prayer and praise to God.

And he says, all those who the father gave to him, he's praying that God will not let them go.

And they will not be lost.

That's what Jesus prays to God.

And so when we think about that in reference to the question we're asking, can someone really be be a branch and be cut off?

That's something to keep in mind.

Right.

Jesus prayed all those who are in me that they may not be lost, that they are they're in me.

They're they're good in me.

Now, let's look at another one of Jesus's stories, the parable of the sower.

And Jesus tells us in Luke 8 that about again, the farmers throwing seed, throws on the on the on the street, on the rocks and the thorns and on good healthy soil.

So specifically with the seed that falls on the rocks, it sprouts up quickly, but soon withers away.

And Jesus said this is how Jesus interprets that parable.

He says that they hear the word, receive it with joy, but these have no root.

They believe for a while and in time of testing fall away.

So they seem to be saved.

But in a period of time.

In a testing, they fall away.

They seem to be saved, but are not in Christ and ultimately fall away.

Man, I saw this all the time in student ministry.

A kid start coming, they get involved.

They might pray a prayer and have a in my notes, I put a radical experience because that's what I would have called it back then.

A radical experience, but then give it a month or so, give it some time and they're back doing the same things as before.

Now, of course, that is a very small fraction of that person's life.

Who knows what's going to happen later on in life.

But I would see that time and time again.

No one is saved by just coming to church.

And no one is saved by simply just praying a sinner's prayer.

Now, if we're saying a sinner's prayer in true faith, then not only will Jesus redeem us and save us, but he will never let us go.

But just to pray a prayer, just to throw up a Hail Mary.

Does not save you.

Jesus continues the same verse three.

Already you are clean because of the word that I've spoken to you.

Again, remember, he's speaking specifically to his disciples.

Already you are clean because of the word I've spoken to you.

What word has Jesus spoken to them that cleanses us?

Let's excuse me.

Go back to John 13 verse 10.

Jesus said to them, the one who has bathed does not need to wash except for his feet, but is completely clean.

And you are clean, Jesus says to his disciples, but not every one of you.

For he knew who was to betray him.

That's why he said, not all of you are clean.

I think this is an important note here, because to me, this shows us that bearing fruit is not attached to our salvation.

Bearing fruit is part of our sanctification.

You are already clean, Jesus says to his disciples who were clean.

You're already clean.

You're good.

But you need to bear fruit.

This is a part of our sanctification.

You don't need to bear fruit to earn your salvation.

You bear fruit because of your salvation.

Right?

Apart from me, Jesus said, you can do nothing.

Because our salvation attaches us to the vine.

Because you are attached to me, you will produce fruit.

Now the question is, how do we produce fruit?

I'm so glad you asked.

Verse four.

Abide in me and I in you.

As the branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless it abides in the vine, neither can you unless you abide in me.

This word abide is going to be used 11 times in the matter of 14 verses.

I said this last week and I'll say it again.

Repetition is important.

Repetition is important.

Abide in me, Jesus says 11 times.

And I in you.

Abide.

That word abide means to remain or stay with.

Like lodge.

Like to dwell with.

So verse four.

Abide in me and I in you.

As the branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless it abides in the vine, neither can you unless you abide in me.

I am the vine.

You are the branches.

Whoever abides in me and I in him, he it is that bears much fruit.

For apart from me, you can do nothing.

If anyone does not abide in me, he is thrown away like a branch and withers.

And the branches are gathered, thrown into the fire and burned.

If you abide in me and my words abide in you, ask whatever you wish and it will be done for you.

By this, my Father is glorified that you bear much fruit and so prove to be my disciples.

As the Father has loved me, so I have loved you.

Abide in my love.

If you keep my commandments, you will abide in my love, just as I have kept my Father's commands and abide in his love.

So how do we abide?

How do we remain in Jesus?

Or maybe a better way to ask this question is how do we let Jesus remain in us?

As the first nine says, as the Father has loved me, so have I loved you.

As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you.

I've got a question for you this morning.

Do you truly believe that God loves you?

Do you truly believe that God loves you?

I'll speak for myself here.

Like I understand that God loves me.

I understand that scripturally.

I understand it up here in my head.

But do I know in my heart that God loves me?

Do you know in your heart that God loves you?

We mentioned that word catharsis earlier.

An example of catharsis is an emotional release of something stressful becoming relieved.

Like imagine you need to have a hard conversation with someone and you worked yourself up about it.

And then you finally have this conversation and you can take a deep breath.

You're relieved.

That's that catharsis.

Or you're out in the garden.

You're out doing something.

You're out mowing your lawn and you finish the work and you look back at the work and you go, I did good here.

That's catharsis.

That sense of relief.

That sense of accomplishment.

That sense of honestly joy.

When Josh preached a few weeks ago, he mentioned the closeness of John, the author of this book that we're reading, to Jesus.

How they were in that upper room.

And John is literally like snuggled up next to Jesus.

Like this closeness to Jesus.

Do you feel like you could be that close to Jesus and feel comfortable and feel that sense of attachment?

That sense of love?

Of being that close to Jesus?

Of being snuggled up to Jesus?

To Jesus.

Do you feel like you could do that?

Or do you have this maybe feeling of, man I might be a little uncomfortable.

That might be a little awkward.

Do you feel that you could be that close with Jesus and feel that sense of comfort and closeness?

Why am I talking about this?

Because I believe our abiding in Jesus begins with love.

Why?

Verse 9.

As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you.

Abide in my love.

Remain in Jesus' love.

Make your home in the love of Jesus.

I'll speak specifically for me.

I know growing up I just desired to be liked.

I just so bad wanted to be liked, to be in the popular crowd, to be accepted, to be loved.

I would do just about anything to keep that status, to keep that closeness, closeness to coolness maybe.

As silly as that sounds.

And in my relationship with Jesus, I can desire this.

I can desire this, that same sort of feeling.

That I have to do all the right things and if I don't, he's going to get rid of me.

They're going to find new friends.

They're going to, I'm going to be the lame kid sitting alone at lunch.

That's going to be me with Jesus if I don't do all the right things, if I don't say all the right things, if I don't get everything exactly right.

And first, that's just, that's terrible theology.

Don't let your feelings lead your theology.

Second, it's a lie.

Why?

Because Jesus' life, death, and resurrection show how much Jesus loves me.

Shows how much Jesus loves you.

And he doesn't just stop there.

He has given us his Holy Spirit to make his home in us.

God loves me.

God loves you.

And there is nothing you can do about it.

Absolutely nothing you can do about it.

It reminds me of the scene in Elf where Buddy the elf goes on a date with Josie.

They finish the date.

And what does Elf do?

I'm in love, I'm in love, and I don't care who knows it.

That's how Jesus thinks of you.

I'm in love, I'm in love, and I don't care who knows it.

I will make a fool out of myself.

I will leave my place at the right hand of God.

I will come to earth and be born as a baby.

Will live 30 years anonymously.

And then for three years I will go and declare how much I love you, how much I care about you, how to follow me, how to live with me, how to abide in me.

And I will take up a cross.

I will be stripped naked.

I will be beaten.

I will be bruised.

I will be nailed to a cross to show how much I love you.

Maybe you can relate to me in that desire to be liked, that desire to be wanted.

Or maybe you didn't hear I love you growing up.

You didn't feel the connection and affection that you so desired growing up.

Maybe your examples of love through your parents are the complete opposite of the way Jesus loves you.

Whatever it is, know that the love of Jesus is greater than your earthly experience of love.

And that Jesus desires that we remain in his love.

Sometimes I think it can be easy for us to dismiss emotion, dismiss, I'll speak for myself.

It can be easy for me to dismiss emotion, to dismiss this feeling because how often feelings change.

But if we cannot emotionally sit in the fact that Jesus loves us and feel that sense of comfort and joy, we're missing it because Jesus desires that for you and for me.

And let's speak really practically here.

If we cannot sit in that emotional connection with Jesus, there's no way that your children will be able to have that emotional connection with you either.

There's no way your spouse will be able to have that emotional connection with you.

And so emotions are not everything, but they are something.

And so we must not completely dismiss our emotions.

We must not completely dismiss the fact of how God loves us.

And he wants us to abide.

He wants us to remain in his love.

He wants us to dwell, to lodge.

That's what that word like, like I'm going to an Airbnb lodge.

Now don't get it twisted.

He also calls us to follow in his ways and commands.

But know that just as a loving father disciplines his children, so does God love us and disciplines and prunes us.

I love that Psalm that we read this morning, how God separates our sins as far as the East is from the West.

How often do we hold on to our sin and not let, not allow, not live in the fact that through the blood of Jesus, we have been separated from our sins.

And we can snuggle up with Jesus just as John did at that table.

Be fully known, fully loved by the God of the universe.

Would you pray with me?

Jesus, we thank you for loving us.

For loving us far more than we could ever imagine.

And through the power of your spirit, may we not just know in our heads that you love us.

Because we know you do.

Because your word is true.

But through the power of your spirit, may you show us in our hearts how much you love us.

For I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor rulers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor anything else in all creation will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

For I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor rulers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come, nor things to come,
