---
layout: sermon
title: "John 10:1-21"
date: "2025-02-23T14:36:35.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/98949341/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-1-24%2F395440209-44100-2-e7e2d3755290c.m4a"
duration: "26:32"
scripture: "John 10:1-21"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>Jesus is the Good Shepherd. </p>\n
guid: 4580418a-a022-49c4-8391-d9b3e41f61ab
episode_id: 2ef12a63
---

## Transcription

Alright, John chapter 10, we'll end up reading the whole chapter.

But before we jump in, just want to remind you this Wednesday, we have our prayer and worship gathering that is not at Madison's Court Garden, but is at the Reader Esparza's house.

And on top of that, my calendar told me that today is Ethan Fraser's birthday.

So this will be a test to see if Ethan actually listens to the messages.

So happy birthday, Ethan.

And let's turn to John chapter 10 and why don't we read the whole chapter.

Truly, truly I say to you, he who does not enter the sheepfold by the door but climbs in by another way, that a man is a thief and a robber.

But he who enters by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.

To him the gatekeeper opens.

The sheep hear his voice and he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.

When he is brought out all of his own, he goes before them and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice.

A stranger they will not follow, but they will flee from him, for they do not know the voice of strangers.

This figure of speech Jesus used with them, but they did not understand what he was saying to them.

So Jesus again said to them, truly, truly I say to you, I am the door of the sheep.

All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them.

I am the door.

If anyone enters by me, he will be saved and will go in and out and find pasture.

The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy.

I came that they may have life and have it abundantly.

I am the good shepherd.

The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.

He who is a hired hand and not a shepherd who does not own the sheep, sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep and flees and the wolf snatches them and scatters them.

He flees because he is a hired hand and cares nothing for the sheep.

I am the good shepherd.

I know my own and my own know me, just as the father knows me and I know the father and I lay down my life for the sheep.

And I have other sheep that are not of this world.

I must bring them also and they will listen to my voice.

So there will be one flock, one shepherd.

For this reason, the father loves me because I lay down my life that I may take it up again.

No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord.

I have authority to lay it down and I have authority to take it up again.

This charge I have received from my father.

There was again a division among the Jews because of these words.

Many of them said, he has a demon and is insane.

Why listen to him?

Others said, these are not the words of one who is oppressed by a demon.

And the demon opened the eyes of the blind.

At that time, the Feast of Dedication took place at Jerusalem.

It was winter and Jesus was walking in the temple and the Colonnade of Solomon.

So the Jews gathered around him and said to him, how long will you keep us in suspense?

If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.

Jesus answered them, I told you and you do not believe the works that I do in my father's name bear witness about me, but you do not believe because you are not among my sheep.

My sheep hear my voice and I know them and they follow me.

I give them eternal life and they will never perish and no one will snatch them out of my hand.

My father who has given them to me is greater than all and no one is able to snatch them out of the father's hand.

I and the father are one.

The Jews picked up stones again to stone him.

Jesus answered them, I have shown you many good works from the father.

For which of them are you going to stone me?

The Jews answered him, it is not for good work that we are going to stone you.

But for blasphemy because you being a man make yourself God.

Jesus answered them, is it not written in your law?

I said, you are gods.

If he called them gods to whom the word of God came and scripture cannot be broken, do you say of him whom the father consecrated and sent into the world?

You are blaspheming because I said I am the son of God.

If I am not doing the works of my father, then do not believe me.

But if I do them, even though you do not believe me, believe the works that you may know and understand the father is in me and I am the father.

Again, they sought to arrest him, but he escaped from their hands.

He went away across the Jordan to the place where John had been baptizing at first and there he remained.

And many came to him and they said, John did no sign, but everything that John said about this man was true and many believed in him there.

Awesome.

So, chapter 10 starts and we see in the first six verses there, Jesus is talking and the people he's talking to have no idea what he's talking about.

So we'll reread it and then I've got some context on sort of shepherds and what it was like to shepherd at that time.

And yeah, let me read it for us.

Truly, truly I say to you, he who does not enter the sheepfold by the door, but climbs in another way, that man is a thief and a robber.

But he who enters by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.

To him, the gatekeeper opens the sheep, hear his voice and he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.

When he has brought out all his own, he goes before them and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice.

A stranger they will not follow, but they will flee from him, for they do not know the voice of strangers.

This figure of speech Jesus used with them, but they did not understand what he was saying to them.

So in those days, it was very common that there would be one large sort of central pin and or a sheepfold and in a given community.

So at the end of the day, the people who paid into this sheepfold would bring their small individual flocks of sheep.

They would bring them into this bigger pen and with their combined money, they would pay this gatekeeper and it was his job to stay there overnight.

And then in the morning, the gatekeeper opened the gate and each individual shepherd would go in to the gate, call out his sheep.

And it was actually quite common that, like, well, a good shepherd would really know his sheep and would name them.

And so he would call, you know, lamb chop and so on and so forth, lamb shank.

And he would call them and the sheep would know his voice in return.

And so the sheep then would follow him and then they would leave this large pen and go out and do their thing.

And so hearing that sort of context, understanding that, well, we do.

We can read the rest of the story with a little bit more understanding.

Verse seven.

So Jesus said to them, truly, truly, I say to you, I am the door of the sheep.

All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them.

I am the door.

If anyone enters by me, he will be saved and will go in and out and find pasture.

The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy.

I came that they may have life and have it abundantly.

We see a few characters in this text, and so I'll kind of go down the list of characters and we'll some of it is kind of self-explanatory.

Others, sort of not so much.

So the sheep would be the Jews, right?

The shepherd.

I mean, Jesus says it himself.

I am the good shepherd.

So thanks.

Jesus also says that he is the door.

Then later in verse 16, we will see there are other sheep.

Those would be the Gentiles.

Then we see the gatekeeper and God the Father is the gatekeeper who opens the door of the sheepfold to his shepherd, to the shepherd.

And then we have thieves and robbers, which I believe he's talking about the Jewish religious leaders.

And this one might seem most debated because you've probably heard John 10, 10, the thief only comes to steal, kill and destroy.

And usually when that is taught, it's taught from the enemy.

It's the devil.

It's Satan, which can be true.

Those are true.

But most likely Jesus was referring to the Jewish religious leaders.

And we can know this by Old Testament texts, specifically Ezekiel 34, but also Jeremiah 23.

And why don't we actually turn there?

Because I'm going to read quite a few verses from there.

Jeremiah 23.

And you will.

Yeah, it's going to.

It'll make sense.

Jeremiah 23.

Woe to the shepherds, starting verse one, who destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture, declares the Lord.

Therefore, thus says the Lord, the God of Israel concerning the shepherds who care for my people.

You have scattered my flock and I've driven them away and you have not attended to them.

Behold, I will attend to you for your evil deeds, declares the Lord.

Then I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all the countries where I have driven them and I will bring them back to the fold and they shall be fruitful and multiply.

I will set shepherds over them who will care for them and they shall fear no more nor be dismayed.

Neither shall any be missing, declares the Lord.

Behold, the days are coming, declares the Lord, when I will raise up for David a righteous branch and he shall reign as king and deal wisely and shall execute justice and righteousness in the land.

In his days, Judah will be saved and Israel will dwell securely.

And this is the name by which he will be called.

The Lord is our righteousness.

Okay, so what do we see in this text?

First, we see the Lord talking and we see the shepherds who care for his people, his chosen people, the Israelites.

The Lord is not talking to Satan.

He is talking to his shepherds about his people, his flock, his sheep.

And what does God say?

Multiple times the Lord says, Behold, I, right?

This is what will the Lord do.

He will attend to their evil deeds.

He will gather the remnant of his flock.

He will bring them back to the fold.

He will set shepherds over them who will care for them.

Behold, the days are coming, declares the Lord, when I will raise up for David a righteous branch.

Behold, the days are coming.

So in John 10, 11, when Jesus calls himself the good shepherd, any good Jew would also be thinking about Psalm 23.

Of course, the Lord is my shepherd.

Jesus is the good shepherd who leads his sheep.

And all of these goodies we see are wrapped up in these six verses in Jeremiah.

If we wanted more evidence, we could turn to Ezekiel 34, which has the same sort of verbiage as this Jeremiah passage of God talking to the Jews and this thieves and robbers and all these things.

And so it's there.

Jeremiah 23, Ezekiel 34, and then we see Jesus using this prophetic language and also illustrating what he's doing, why he came, all these things wrapped up here in John 10.

Bible's really cool.

John 10, verse 7.

So again, Jesus said to them, Truly, truly I say to you, I am the door of the sheep.

All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them.

I am the door.

If anyone enters by me, he will be saved and will go in and out and find pasture.

The thief comes only to steal, kill, and destroy.

I came that they may have life and have it abundantly.

I am the good shepherd.

The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.

Jesus is the good shepherd.

Jesus is the shepherd from Psalm 23.

Of course, David starts, the Lord is my shepherd.

There it is.

The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep.

The Lord said in Jeremiah and throughout the Old Testament that he would raise up a branch from David.

And well, David was a good shepherd.

We can remember a young David who went out to give his brothers a couple sandwiches and they're all waiting there and there's Goliath there in the far.

And David approaches King Saul and says, I'll go fight him.

And then Saul sort of laughs at him and says, what are you kid going to do?

And then David recalls when he fought the bear and he fought a lion.

And so surely he can take on this Philistine.

David was being a good shepherd, not just going out and hunting for a lion or a bear, but protecting the sheep.

David was a good shepherd and Jesus is the good shepherd who laid down his life for his sheep.

Verse 12 continues, he who is a hired hand and not a shepherd who does not own the sheep sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep and flees.

And the wolf snatches them and scatters them.

He flees because he is a hired hand and cares for nothing for the sheep.

I am a good shepherd.

I know my own and my own know me.

Just as the father knows me and I know the father and I lay down my life for the sheep.

Notice here how Jesus does not compare himself to the thieves and the robbers.

Jesus does not compare himself to the Jewish religious leaders.

Why?

Because they were not doing what they were supposed to be doing from the beginning.

They were too busy building their own kingdoms, getting rich themselves, doing their own things and not actually pointing the people to God or protecting the flock like they were supposed to.

And so because of that they became thieves and robbers.

Jesus compares himself here to the hired hand.

If a hired hand runs into a wolf he can just up and go.

No thanks.

You want some lamb?

You can go for it.

I'll go find a different job.

I'll keep my life.

But the good shepherd knows his sheep.

The good shepherd has counted the cost for his sheep.

The good shepherd knows his sheep and not the hired hand.

First let me remind us that we are all Jesus's sheep.

We are all sheep and yes we are all sheep.

Yes I myself as a pastor might be a hired hand but I am not the shepherd.

I don't own you.

You don't belong to me.

Jesus Christ is your shepherd.

All you can hope for me is that I am a good hireling.

Who points you to the good shepherd.

And baa's alongside you as we follow him.

Verse 16.

And I have other sheep that are not of this fold.

I must bring them also and they will listen to my voice so there will be one flock one shepherd.

There are other sheep.

Praise God for verse 16 that there are other sheep.

Because I don't know your 23 and me but I will assume that none of us are Jewish.

But we are other sheep.

And Jesus brings us in also and we get to live in the same place.

We get to listen to his voice so there will be one flock and one shepherd.

If the Israelites in this illustration are sheep the other sheep would be non-Jews.

Gentiles who are not in the fold of the Israelites.

And of course we will see this played out in Acts and many of the other letters in the New Testament.

The struggle for the Jews to accept Gentiles into the fold of what God was doing.

But Jesus tells us there is one flock and one shepherd.

A point Paul will make and a point that Peter will one day dream about.

Verse 17.

For this reason the father loves me because I lay down my life that I may take it up again.

No one takes it from me but I lay it down on my own accord.

I have authority to lay it down and I have authority to take it up again.

This charge I have received from my father.

If you ever wondered why the Pharisees couldn't stone Jesus here's why.

They cannot take Jesus's life.

Jesus has to give up his life.

Jesus lays his life down.

Stupid joke incoming but it reminds me of Ben Stiller in the movie Dodgeball.

Where he goes nobody makes me bleed my own blood.

Well that's kind of I told you a stupid joke.

That's kind of true for Jesus.

Jesus gives up his life.

They do not take it from him.

And guess what he has the authority to take it up again.

And he received that charge from his father.

What good news.

Let's just sit in these words from Jesus one more time.

For this reason the father loves me because I lay down my life that I might take it up again.

No one takes it from me but I lay it down on my own accord.

I have authority to lay it down and I have authority to take it up again.

This charge I have received from my father.

As we saw this morning the leaders of Israel failed to shepherd the flock.

The Pharisees failed to shepherd the flock.

And like them the leaders of the church are called to be shepherds.

But we too often fail to shepherd the people of God.

Therefore let us keep our eyes on the good shepherd who laid down his life for us.

Let us keep our eyes on the good shepherd who laid down his life for us.

Because we are his sheep.

Are you struggling to hear his voice?

Are you feeling like a sheep stuck in the ditch?

Are you a sheep who as David said in Psalm 23 his rod and his staff comfort you?

Are you a sheep needing discipline and correction?

Whatever and however you find yourself this morning may you turn to your good shepherd.

May you worship your good shepherd.

May you cry out to your good shepherd because he knows your voice.

Let me pray for us and we'll close with the time of worship through song.

Father we thank you for the gift of Jesus.

We thank you for the gift of your word.

We thank you Jesus for everything.

We thank you for being our good shepherd.

A shepherd who will lay his life down for his sheep.

A shepherd who will be like a lamb to the slaughter.

We thank you Jesus.

That you are the good shepherd.

Remind us that we are sheep.

Sometimes I know I can think I'm so much more than that.

That I'm something special.

But as I sit here and read your word and study your word I see how useless I am.

I'm humbled that you God know me.

That you would allow me to hear your voice and that in turn you would hear my voice.

What have I done to deserve this other than jump into a ditch like a silly sheep?

God may I follow your voice.

God may I follow your voice.

God may I follow your leading and guiding.

Knowing that when I go through the darkest valleys, when I go into the ditch that you are there with me.

That you are there guiding me.

That you are there to lift me out of the ditch.

That you are there to be beside me through the darkest valleys.

And because of that I will fear no evil for you are with me.

Thank you for your rod and staff that comfort me.

We love you Lord.

We thank you for your word.

We thank you for its truth.

We thank you that you're with us Father.

We worship you this morning.

It's in Jesus name everyone said.

Amen.
