---
layout: sermon
title: "John 12:9-19"
date: "2025-03-31T00:15:58.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/100604665/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-2-31%2F397523261-44100-2-7b359aba212a5.m4a"
duration: "37:23"
scripture: "John 12:9-19"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>Jesus Triumphal Entry </p>\n
guid: 2c12ff81-29a8-4f76-bb0b-d5bd3118010f
episode_id: 173994f0
---

## Transcription

This morning we will turn to John chapter 12.

We're gonna read the whole chapter this morning, since we didn't get to do that last week.

John chapter 12.

And as you're turning there, let me remind you of our prayer and worship gathering this Wednesday coming up.

Really looking forward to it.

And yeah, I'm excited for what we've got going on.

It'll fit what we're somewhat talking about this morning and even then some.

So, yeah, we'd love to see you at the Reader of Sparses house this Wednesday as we pray and worship together.

And yeah, John chapter 12.

Let me also remind you, if you haven't yet signed up for VBS, that link is in Slack.

I'll get a re-re-sending of, we'll repost it here soon.

That's coming up sooner than we think, so get ready for that.

John chapter 12.

We're in it for the long haul.

If somebody would like to start.

The house was filled with the fragrance of the perfume, but Judas just carried it.

One of his disciples, he was about to betray him, said, Why was this weapon not sold for 300 denarii and given to the poor?

He said this not because he cared about the poor, but because he was a thief and having charge of the money bag he used to help himself to what was put into it.

He just said, Leave her alone so that she may keep it for the day of my burial.

The poor you always have with you, but you do not always have none.

The large crowd of the Jews learned that Jesus was there.

They came not only on account of him, but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.

So the chief priests made plans to put Lazarus to death as well, because on account of him, many of the Jews were going away and believing in Jesus.

The next day, the large crowd that had come to the feast heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem.

So they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet him, crying out, Hosanna, blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, even the king of Israel.

And Jesus found a young donkey and sat on it, just as it was written, Fear not, daughter of Zion, behold, with your king is coming, sitting on a donkey's colt.

His disciples did not understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things had been written about him and had been done to him.

The crowd that had been with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead continued to bear witness.

The reason why the crowd went to meet him was that they heard he had done this sign.

So the Pharisees said to one another, you see that you are gaining nothing.

Look, the world has gone after him.

Now among those who went up to worship at the feast were some Greeks.

So these came to Philip, who was from the Seda in Galilee, and asked him, Sir, we wish to see Jesus.

Philip went and told Andrew, Andrew and Philip went and told Jesus.

And Jesus answered them, The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.

Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone.

But if it dies, it bears much fruit.

Whoever loves his life loses it, and whoever hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.

If anyone serves me, he must follow me, and where I am, there will my servant be also.

If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.

Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say?

Father, save me from this hour, but for this purpose I have come to this hour.

Father, glorify your name.

Then a voice came from heaven, and I glorified it, and I will glorify it again.

The crowd that stood there and heard it said that it had thunder.

Others said an angel has spoken to him.

Jesus answered, This voice has come for your sake, not mine.

Now is the judgment of this world.

Now will the ruler of this world be cast out, and I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.

He said this to show by what kind of death he was going to die.

So the crowd answered him, We have heard from the law that the Christ remains forever.

How can you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up?

Who is this Son of Man?

So Jesus said to them, The light is among you for a little while longer.

Walk while you have the light, let darkness overtake you.

The one who walks in the darkness does not know where he was going.

While you have the light, believe in the light that you may become sons of light.

When Jesus had said these things, he departed and hid himself from them.

Though he had done so many signs before them, they still did not believe in him, so that the word spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled.

Lord, who has believed what he heard from us, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?

Therefore they could not believe, for again Isaiah said, He has blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, lest they see with their eyes and understand with their heart in turn, and I would heal them.

Isaiah said these things because he saw his glory and spoke of him.

Nevertheless, many even of the authorities believed in him, but for fear of the Pharisees, they did not confess it, so that they would not be put out of the synagogue.

They loved the glory that comes from man, and within the glory that comes from God.

And Jesus cried out and said, Whoever believes in me, believes not in me, but in him who sent me.

And whoever sees me, sees him who sent me.

I have come into the world as light, so that whoever believes in me may not remain in darkness.

If anyone hears my words and does not keep them, I do not judge him, for I have not come to judge the world, but to save the world.

The one who rejects me does not receive my words as a judge.

The word that I have spoken will judge him on the last day.

For I have not spoken on my own authority, but the Father who sent me has himself given me a commandment, what to say and what to speak.

And I know that his commandment is eternal life, but I say therefore, I say as the Father has spoken.

Awesome, thank you.

So, last week we mentioned chapter 12 kind of being the turning point in the book of John.

Chapters 1 through 11 being the book of signs, right?

We see all the miracles, we see the signs.

And from 12 on being sort of the book of glory, as if you were to break it down into two sort of books.

And throughout the first 11 chapters we see many times Jesus would say, my hour has not yet come, right?

And like his first sign, his first miracle, turning water into wine, and he says, woman, what does this have to do with me?

My hour has not yet come.

And then, don't know if you caught it, but around verse 27, Jesus says, now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say?

Father, save me from this hour, but for this purpose I have come to this hour.

So the hour has now come.

And we sort of turn from this sort of longer timeline and longer sort of gathering of stories into really the last week of his life.

And so from chapter 12 to, what is it, 21, we get one week.

So Easter will be here in April, and we will not reach the end.

We'll kind of still be in these last days, but whatever.

So, and we see his glory just beginning as he has this triumphal entry, which is what we're going to spend a majority of our time looking at this morning.

But quickly, let's not skip over these verses here, 9 through 11.

When the large crowd of Jews learned that Jesus was there, they came not only on account of him, but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.

So the chief priests made plans to put Lazarus to death as well, because on account of him, many of the Jews were going away and believing in Jesus.

So the crowd has already heard that Lazarus was raised from the dead, and they want to see it.

They want to go to him.

They want to see him and be like, was he really raised from the dead?

And so what is the thought process of the Pharisees?

We got to kill Lazarus.

Destroy all evidence.

This is like.

It's like the show Dexter, if you guys ever watched that one.

Destroy the evidence.

I was listening to a podcast the other day, and it was talking about this guy who was an FBI undercover agent, and he was with these these motorcycle rings and whatever.

And anyways, he was getting patted down and strips strip search to see if he was carrying any wires, which he was.

Anyways, that's that's just another story for another time.

But he talked about how if you ever get into one of those situations and there's plastic on the ground, you're done.

Like they are planning to kill you because of the the rap and plastic all this stuff.

They're trying to get rid of the evidence.

And that's what we see here.

The Pharisees with Lazarus, they're trying to do this.

They are trying to destroy all evidence of Jesus's miracles.

Why?

Because the people are flocking to him.

What was supposed to happen is happening, but the religious elite are not buying into it.

So their thought process is clearly if we can kill off Lazarus, then there will be less chance the word travels of this miracle because the the sign or the shadow of the which is Lazarus would not be there.

So let's kill him off.

The next day, verse 12, the large crowd that had come to the feast heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem.

So they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet him.

It would have been customary for Jews to come into Jerusalem for Passover.

It's estimated about 2 million Jews would come into Jerusalem for Passover at this time.

So the city is bumping.

It is bumper to bumper traffic.

It is nose to tail traffic.

Right.

It is like it's the city is bustling.

It's a party.

Why?

It's like their Fourth of July.

Right.

It's their liberation.

It's their it's their Declaration of Independence, if you will.

And everyone is coming into town.

So Jesus comes into town and the people heard about it and they take out palm branches.

First question, what's up with these palm branches?

Why are they taking palm branches?

First off, for those who care, it's most likely date palm branches because dates were popular in the region and palm branches were actually a national symbol for the Jews.

So much so that at one point, palm branches were inscribed on their coins.

So they were this sign of freedom.

There are historical Jewish accounts of warriors and leaders who would defeat an enemy.

And when they would return into town, they would be greeted and celebrated with people waving palm branches.

So this crowd waving palm branches at Jesus signaled their nationalist hope that a Messianic liberator was arriving on the scene.

It was a sign that they thought that this person who was coming to save them was going to turn over the Roman Empire and would find liberation and freedom once again for the Jews.

So they meet him outside of the city and they cry out, We're going to break this down kind of ish line by line or really kind of phrase by phrase.

Hosanna, that word means give salvation now.

So when we just say, Hosanna, Hosanna, give salvation now, that is the literal translation of the word.

Give salvation now.

And this is actually a direct quote from Psalm 118, which is part of a larger section of Psalms called the Hallel, which starts at Psalm 113.

That's what we read for our prayer.

These Psalms, they would have been sung in the temple every morning during the Feast of Tabernacles.

They also would be part of the Feast of Dedication, which we learned about a few weeks ago, as well as Passover.

And then later this holiday Hanukkah.

So these Psalms would be sung throughout the Jewish calendar and the Hallel.

Well, first off, where we get the word Halleluja.

You see it in there.

Hallel-uja.

And the word is, if you missed it.

And the word Halleluja is actually inviting a group of people to praise.

And Yah, Hallel, inviting them to praise.

Yah is the object.

It's, hey, let's praise Yahweh.

Y'all praise Yahweh.

And for us more recently, it seems like the word Halleluja has become the praise.

Like, oh, Halleluja, praise God.

Right?

So that's kind of what we would see it as now.

But in Hebrew, in its original context, the Halleluja is a call to praise.

Like, it's an invitation to somebody else that they should praise God.

Halleluja.

Hey, you, praise God.

But specifically at this point, in the Hallel, in Psalm 118, they would get to verse 25.

And in the English, it says, save us, we pray, oh, Lord.

In the Hebrew, it would say, Hosanna, save us, we pray, oh, Lord.

Oh, Lord, we pray, give us success.

That's Psalm 118, verse 25.

And when this Psalm would have been sung at the Feast of Dedication, at these different things in the temple, at these different festivals in the temple, at this exact verse, the men would wave palm branches.

So they have palm branches and they're waving them, saying, save us, we pray, oh, Lord.

Oh, Lord, we pray, give us success.

So as Jesus is riding into town, they are proclaiming, Hosanna, or save us, we pray, oh, Lord.

Then the people continue.

Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, which is the next verse in Psalm 118.

Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, we bless you from the house of the Lord.

So in the Psalm, originally, it was referring to blessing a pilgrim on their journey to Jerusalem.

It could be referring to a king or some sort of liberator, but it's not explicitly said that it is referring to someone like that.

But although if we look at the Hallel more broadly, which, spoiler alert, we will on Wednesday for our prayer and worship gathering, when we look at it more broadly, we will see this sort of Exodus story arc, which of course, they're singing it at Passover, they're singing at all these different festivals.

And so there is this Exodus arc throughout these Psalms.

That's the story of being captive, being rescued and being led to freedom.

So there's this movement through the Psalms of being captive, being rescued, being led to freedom.

So the line in this Psalm 118 verse 26 could definitely be understood messianically, because there was and is someone who is doing the rescuing and the leading and leading them to freedom.

However, the next line that we see in John 12, it completely deviates from the Hallel.

So they have ditched the Psalms and they have picked up from their own volition, even the king of Israel.

And this is an identification of the Messiah.

So they are recognizing and proclaiming that Jesus is a Messiah of type.

The crowd is making their own distinction of who Jesus is, but their demonstration, their waving of the palms, their declaration of Hosanna, it was under different pretenses.

It came with its own bag of assumptions.

And their demonstration was under the assumption that Jesus was coming as a militant king, as a king who would overthrow Rome and lead them to freedom, free the Jews once again.

But Jesus makes himself completely clear, not through his spoken word, but by his mode of transportation.

Verse 14, and Jesus found on a young donkey and sat on it.

If Jesus would have come in on a horse, it would have been this, I'm coming to overthrow.

I'm coming.

I'm coming for war.

If he, if Jesus comes in on a big horse and rides in like a boss, he would have been saying like, let's lock and load.

Let's do this thing.

But instead, John tells us he comes in on a young donkey.

And if we were to look at the other gospels, they would give us a lot more detail how even Jesus, well, I guess we get the prophecy here.

So John does include that.

But the other gospels give us a lot more details on this scene.

But John decides to keep it short and sweet here.

And it's a young donkey, which the descriptor of it being young probably means this donkey is not well trained.

So it's not like Jesus is riding in on a Clydesdale, right?

This isn't a Budweiser commercial from the Super Bowl.

He's coming in on a young donkey and he's probably trying his best not to fall off that thing.

Jesus does not show up as a king, high and mighty on a horse.

Jesus shows up as a king, lowly in peace and riding on a donkey, fulfilling prophecy from Zechariah 9.9.

Fear not, daughter of Zion, behold, your king is coming, sitting on a donkey's colt.

And what a statement that is.

Jesus does not show up how we want him to, but how we need him to.

Jesus did not come for an earthly kingdom.

The earth is already his.

Jesus came on a mission not to overthrow Rome, but to overthrow death, sin and the grave.

And Jesus does not show up how we would like him to, but how we need him to.

That's easier said than believed, but the truth nonetheless.

John 12, 16.

His disciples did not understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things had been written about him and had been done to him.

I love this added commentary we get again from John, and it's incredibly relatable.

They did not understand what was going on until after Jesus ascended into heaven.

And they're looking back and they're talking and through the power of the Spirit they're going like, do you remember Jesus?

He came in on a donkey.

You guys remember the prophecy from Zechariah?

Do you remember?

Like it's all this like it's like it's almost like a montage in a movie.

All right.

Or it's like all these things lined up and you had no idea what was going on.

And they're like, oh, we better write this down.

Some of you know, some of you may not.

I didn't meet my biological father until I was 25.

And this brought about certain challenges and questions and hardship in my life.

Well, come to find out parts of that time where my with my bio, my biological father, he was involved in certain activities that were, let's just say, not God honoring or law abiding.

And now I can look back and see that God was protecting me from some things that could have affected me even more than fatherlessness.

We see sometimes we need space and perspective in our lives to see there's often more to the story than our lived experience.

And I don't say this to diminish your lived experience or the things that you've gone through or even will go through.

The point I'm trying to make is even in the worst of circumstances, God can heal, restore, and you can get through it, even if it fully doesn't make sense now.

Will things in life always make sense?

No.

But that doesn't mean that God can't get the glory and you can't rise above.

I don't know.

God will get the glory and you can rise above.

Did you not have the best childhood?

Did you not have the greatest father or mother growing up?

Did you not have a marital example of what you're trying to go for?

That's OK.

You don't have to fall into the same cycle as your parents or your grandparents or the generations of past.

No.

Through the power of the Spirit and through the scriptures and submitting ourselves to these things, no, you can have a different story.

Verse 17, The crowd that had been with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead continued to bear witness.

So not only is it already spreading, right?

The crowd who saw Lazarus, who heard of it, went and saw him, now they're sharing.

It's this ripple effect.

Verse 18, The reason why the crowd went to meet him was that they heard he had done this sign.

So the Pharisees said to one another, You see that you are gaining nothing.

Look, the world has gone after him.

How could you not bear witness when you have seen such a miraculous sign?

They went to see Jesus because they heard of the sign.

They went to see Jesus because of the sign.

I mean, the dude Lazarus was dead and now he's not.

That would go viral instantaneously now, right?

Oh my gosh, did you hear about this guy?

He was dead for four days.

Now he's not.

How could they not bear witness?

And I will ask the same question to us.

How could we not bear witness when we've seen such miraculous signs?

You see, this is the story of the church.

Point to the resurrection, not of Lazarus, but of Jesus himself.

How could we not point to that miraculous sign?

It is a miraculous sign that cannot be debunked.

Sure, it can be argued.

And I've heard a lot of points.

But you still can't go find Jesus's grave.

You can't find Jesus in a grave.

The other day, Kayla was out at a park date with the person that she had been praying for.

We've been talking about praying for people and asking God to soften our hearts towards people.

She was out at the park with this person and Kayla got an opportunity to share some of how Jesus had impacted her life.

And then she called me on the phone after and was doubting herself if she should have even brought Jesus up at all.

And she was just second-guessing herself like most of us do when we step out in faith or we share our faith and we go, Should I have said that?

Did I say the right thing?

Did I blablabla?

And eventually I told her on the phone, I said, We are trying to live our lives in such a way that Jesus is the only answer.

We are trying to live our lives in such a way that I don't know what else to tell you, but this is how Jesus helped me.

And this isn't in some sort of cliche or coffee cup kind of answer or response.

But if you take a step back, the way you live your life, is it oriented in such a way that Jesus is the point?

When you take a step back, the way you live your life, is it oriented in such a way that Jesus is the point?

The way you handle your house, the way you use your money, the things on your calendar, is Jesus the point?

Is seeking His kingdom first the point?

Which Jesus told Him Himself, Seek first the kingdom and all will be added.

Jesus must be the point of it all.

And guess what?

We're going to fall short of that.

There will be moments, there will be times, there will be seasons where Jesus is not the point.

Why?

Because we are fallen, broken, and human sinners.

We have broken God's law.

We have put other things before God.

We have made for ourself an idol.

We have misused the name of the Lord our God.

But thank God for the good news of Jesus Christ who rode into town on a donkey.

Not to conquer kings and emperors, but to conquer death and sin and the grave.

Later, even the words of Jesus, He tells us what He desires.

Verse 23, And Jesus answered them, The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.

Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone.

But if it dies, it bears much fruit.

Whoever loves his life loses it.

And whoever hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.

Are you living your life in such a way that Jesus is the point?

Jesus continues, If anyone serves me, he must follow me.

Are you living up to that?

And where I am, there my servant will be also.

If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.

We cannot live up to that.

But thank God for His grace that catches us.

Thank God for His mercy that keeps us.

So that we can be like these people who were at one point screaming, Hosanna, Hosanna.

Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, even the King of Israel.

But then later we'll go, crucify him, crucify him, crucify him.

That is you and me.

And yet, while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.

We can rest, not in our works, because they fall short.

But we rest in the finished work of Christ, who declared on that cross, it is finished.

That's the good news that the church has rallied around for centuries.

And we would be foolish to not rally around that ourselves.

Because daily, weekly, we need to be reminded that it is not about us.

That we are not the point of our story.

That we are not the point of our lives.

But our lives are to be a point and to point others to Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith.

And so to wrap up this morning, I'm going to pray for us.

And I want us to stand and sing, Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna in the highest, one more time.

As a declaration of our salvation, remembering that Hosanna means give salvation now.

And that we can rest in the salvation of Jesus.

Jesus, we love you.

We thank you for your word.

We thank you for your truth.

We thank you for the truth.

We're sorry for how often we fall short.

For how often we make ourselves the point of our story.

But we thank you for the times and opportunities where we get to point to you.

Father, may we do that with our spouses.

May we do that with our children.

May we do that with our co-workers.

And Father, help us live in such a way where you are the point.

Why?

Because you are.

And you will get the glory, regardless if we give it to you or not.

But we are your people and you have called us and chosen us to follow you.

And so we will try our best not for salvation or to earn it or to prove it.

But because you loved us enough to give us a chance to follow you.

And so we sing to you.

And we sing as a reminder of your salvation.

That you have given to us through your son Jesus.

We thank you Father.

Come on let's stand and sing.

Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna in the highest.

Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna in the highest.

Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna in the highest.

Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna in the highest.

Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna in the highest.

Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna in the highest.

Hail my heart and make it clean.

Open up my eyes to the things unseen.

Show me how to love like you have loved me.

Break my heart for what breaks yours.

Everything I am for your kingdom's cause.

As I walk from earth into eternity.

Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna in the highest.

Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna in the highest.

Hosanna in the highest.

Hosanna in the highest.

Jesus we thank you that you gave us salvation and that we can be found in you.

We pray that you would be with us and go before us this week.

It's in Jesus name everyone said.

Amen.
