---
layout: sermon
title: "John 12:35-50"
date: "2025-04-13T16:58:21.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/101269731/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-3-14%2F398371556-44100-2-2dfdd3e55689.m4a"
duration: "31:27"
scripture: "John 12:35-50"
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: <p>Jesus was sent on mission. </p>

guid: fff4effb-5a36-4818-ac4b-69f72e666efb
episode_id: eb9c714e
---

## Transcription

John 12, 35-50 if somebody wants to read it.

So Jesus said to them, the light is among you for a little longer, walk while you have the light, lest the darkness overtake you.

The one who walks in the darkness does not know where he is going.

While you have the light, believe in the light that you may become sons of light.

When Jesus had said these things, he departed and hid himself from them.

Though he had done so many signs before them, they still did not believe in him.

So that the word spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled.

Lord who has believed what he heard from us and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed.

Therefore they could not believe.

For again Isaiah said, he has blinded their eyes and hardened their heart.

Lest they see with their eyes and understand with their heart in turn, I would heal them.

Isaiah said these things because he saw his glory and spoke of him.

Nevertheless, many even of the authorities believed in him.

But for fear of the Pharisees, they did not confess it so they would not be put out of the synagogue.

For they love the glory that comes from man more than the glory that comes from God.

And Jesus cried out and said, whoever believes in me, believes not in me, but in him who sent me.

And whoever sees me, sees him who sent me.

I have come into the world as light so that whoever believes in me may not remain in darkness.

If anyone hears my words and does not keep them, I do not judge him.

For I did not come to judge the world, but to save the world.

The one who rejects me and does not receive my word has a judge.

The word that I have spoken will judge him on the last day.

For I have not spoken on my own authority, but the Father who sent me as himself given me a commandment, what to say and what to speak.

And I know that his commandment is eternal life.

What I say therefore, I say as the Father has told me.

Thank you.

All right, let's get in proper context here.

Just cause we've been in chapter 12 for like a month now.

And you might've forgot where we've came from, what happened before.

So Jesus has his triumphal entry.

Welcome to Palm Sunday.

Woo.

That's reverse 12.

Then they go into town for the feast.

That's about verse 20.

And then these Greeks want to talk to Jesus.

Okay.

So there's some sort of crowd around Jesus and with Jesus.

And these Greeks can't get to Jesus.

And so they ask.

And then amidst all this, God speaks to Jesus.

That's verse 29.

And then Jesus tells us in verse 30, this voice has come for your sake, not mine.

Now is the judgment of this world.

Now will the ruler of the world be cast out.

And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.

And now John inserts himself into this story.

And he says, he said these things to show by what kind of death he was going to die.

Then 34 continues.

So the crowd answered him, we have heard from the law that the Christ remains forever.

How can you say that the son of man must be lifted up?

Who is the son of man?

And then we, what we read this morning is Jesus answered to them.

But this question that they have is actually legit.

It's a legit question.

They're not trying to be like, like mean to Jesus.

They're just asking him a question.

And cause their understanding of the Old Testament is that the Messiah remains forever.

And there's plenty of texts that support this.

We see it in Isaiah chapter nine, Ezekiel 37, Psalm 72, Psalm 89.

So it's all, it's literal all over the Old Testament.

So they asked Jesus how these two things can be true at the same time.

How can the son of man be lifted up, as Jesus just said, and also be the son of man?

How can these two things be true at the same time?

Cause the expectation of the Messiah of the times would have been a triumphant Messiah and an eternal Messiah.

So how are you going to die and be triumphant and also be eternal?

Of course, we know how Jesus does these two things because he doesn't stay in the grave.

Anyways, this is the thinking of the Jews present in the story.

And it also would have been the thinking of the Jews who were first reading this letter, who were first reading this book.

They would have been wondering what kind of Messiah was Jesus claiming to be.

And so how does Jesus answer this question?

Verse 35, Jesus said to them, "'The light is among you for a little while longer.

Walk while you have the light, lest darkness overtake you.

The one who walks in darkness does not know where he is going.

While you have the light, believe in the light that you may become sons of light.'" So John has pulled on this theme of light for like the entire book, it feels like, right?

We of course have the I am statement.

I am the light of the world.

Light of the world.

Even in the prologue, go back all the way to John 1 verse 5. "'The light shines in the darkness and the darkness has not overcome it.'" And here, Jesus is saying again, the light or I am the light, right?

This is what Jesus is saying, not what I'm saying.

I'm in quotations here.

Jesus is saying, the light or I am among you for a little while longer, walk while you have me.

While you have me, believe in me that you might become sons of me.

That's what Jesus is saying, right?

Walk in the light while you have the light.

Oh, sorry.

That was your stomach?

Yes.

I thought it was a camel.

No.

A donkey.

A donkey, a donkey.

Anyways.

Jesus says these things and I just can't help but think of God calling Abraham.

Well, Abram at the time, but he calls Abram out to follow him, right?

Genesis 12 verse one.

Now the Lord said to Abram, go from your country and your kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you.

And I will make you a great nation and I will bless you and make your name great so that you will be a blessing.

I will bless those who bless you and who dishonors you.

I will curse and in you, all the families of the earth shall be blessed.

So Abram went as the Lord had told him.

So Abram went, he believed as the Lord told him.

And this is essentially what Jesus is telling these Jews to do.

They, I mean, they just heard a voice from heaven.

Some of them did not know what it was.

Some of them thought it was an angel.

Some of them thought it was thunder, but still they just heard this voice from heaven.

And then the Jews asked this question of Jesus and Jesus is essentially calling them to follow the light.

Follow him, believe in him and the darkness will not overtake them.

So Jesus says this and then he leaves.

Verse 36, when he had said these things, he departed and hid himself from them.

Though he had done so many signs before them, they still did not believe in him.

The Jews did still not believe.

Why?

This theme of unbelief has been littered throughout this gospel.

So how come the Jews don't believe in Jesus?

They thought they did not need him.

They thought they did not need him.

By and large, the nation of Israel refused the regeneration through the spirit that Jesus has been talking about from the beginning.

Let's go back to Nicodemus.

You must be reborn.

Then how does Nicodemus respond?

How am I supposed to go back into my mother's womb?

Right, there's this maybe sarcasm.

We don't understand the tone fully, but there is this questioning, this not fully understanding.

And then later on in chapter nine, the Pharisees, they thought they could see.

Is he calling us blind?

Is he saying we're blind?

Is he saying we don't see?

They did not realize that they were blind.

John will touch on this later in the chapter, verse 43.

He says, for they loved the glory that comes from man more than the glory that comes from God.

All of these signs that Jesus gave were not enough to persuade these people of the truth of Jesus Christ.

Because what was required for faith then is the thing that is required for faith now, the Holy Spirit, who accompanies the word of God to remove the scales from our eyes, to soften our hearts that we might hear and believe.

And now John is going to quote two different passages from Isaiah.

He tells us in verse 38.

So that the word spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled.

Lord who has believed what he heard from us and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed.

Therefore they could not believe.

For again Isaiah said, he has blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts lest they see with their eyes and understand with their heart and turn, and I would heal them.

The first quotation here is from Isaiah 53.

And it's to show that Isaiah prophesied that there would be widespread disbelief and rejection of Jesus.

Now Isaiah 53, even to this day, that's kind of known as the suffering servant part of Isaiah.

And a lot of Jews even to this day do not associate with that chapter of Isaiah because if you read it, you can't help but think of Jesus.

Like I see these videos all the time of these people, whether it be in Israel or even just like in popular Jewish communities, they'll do this kind of game with them.

Where they'll be like, okay, do you think this is like Old Testament?

Do you think this is Torah?

Or do you think this is New Testament?

And then they'll read passages from Isaiah 53.

And almost all the time they go, oh, that's not in the Old Testament because it so describes Jesus.

And so here is John quoting this because there would be widespread disbelief and rejection of Jesus.

And then John makes the point in verse 39 that the people were not able to believe.

They could not believe.

And then John cites Isaiah 6 verses 9 and 10.

And the greater context of Isaiah 6 is the vision of God.

So literally Isaiah has a vision from God to be a prophet.

And God told Isaiah that the people would not receive his message because God had judged Israel.

God had blinded Israel spiritually and given them hard hearts to prevent them from believing.

So what we see and what John is speaking to is God turn Israel over to their sin.

God turning Israel over to their sin.

God does not force people to sin then refuse to rescue them from it.

But God with Israel, with the Pharisees, and certainly we see this happen today, God allows some to be given over to their sin.

And in this fourth gospel, we see the rebelliousness of the people, the hardened hearts of the people, and God judged them with the inability to repent, even though the message of salvation was right before their eyes.

And this isn't a new theme for John either.

We see it in John 6, John 6.44.

No one can come to me, this is the words of Jesus, unless the Father who sent me draws him.

No one can come to belief in Jesus unless the Father has drawn you to Jesus.

The Holy Spirit must cause the sinner to be born again, John 3, and give him or her the gift of faith.

Ephesians 2, 8 tells us, for grace you have been saved through faith.

And this is not your own doing, it is the gift of God.

And it was John's inspired conclusion through the power of the Spirit to say that God refused to do this for the masses who heard Jesus and witnessed his miracles and his signs.

Then we get this last sentence from John on Isaiah.

Isaiah said these things because he saw his glory and spoke of him.

And we're not absolutely certain to whom John is referring to, but John could be taking the words from Isaiah 6, 1, which says, I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up.

So John might be interpreting that passage as Isaiah saw Christ on the throne in his glory, even before Jesus was born, when he had that vision in Isaiah chapter 6.

We turn the page, nevertheless, many even of the authorities believed in him, but for fear of the Pharisees, they did not confess it so that they would not be put out of the synagogue, for they loved the glory that comes from man more than the glory that comes from God.

Even the Pharisees, this religious elite group who opposed Jesus had a silent minority who believed in Jesus, but they cared more about their status and title than to glorify God.

Just let that sit for a minute.

And Jesus cried out and said, verse 44, whoever believes in me believes not in me, but in him who sent me.

And whoever sees me sees him who sent me.

I have come into the world as light so that whoever believes in me may not remain in darkness.

Just a few verses before it tells us that Jesus went and hid himself.

And so we're not sure the crowd who was around Jesus, we could assume this was, there was some sort of crowd, obviously his disciples probably followed Jesus, and I'm sure there was a gaggle of other people who followed Jesus around, because these are Jesus's final words to the crowds.

As we turn to chapter 13, Jesus's focus is completely on his disciples and the cross.

We'll see, of course, chapter 13 starts with Jesus washing his disciples' feet, and then that starts this whole sort of upper room dialogue and all these different prayers and different things that we see Jesus do.

But this is kind of the turn in the chapter, and so these are Jesus's sort of last words to the crowd.

So you think Jesus's last words would be vitally important, like, hey, what's the last thing you're gonna say to the people before you slide away and you go into hiding?

And Jesus cries out, the text tells us, he cries out.

Whoever believes in me believes not in me, but in him who sent me.

And whoever sees me sees him who sent me.

I have come into the world as light so that whoever believes in me may not remain in darkness.

You cannot have the son and reject the father, and you cannot have the father and reject the son.

The father and the son are of the same mind and of the same goal.

And Jesus says here, he was sent into the world as light in the darkness, but not just to be light, but to bring others who would believe in him, bring them into the light also.

If anyone hears my words and does not keep them, I do not judge him for I did not come to judge the world, but to save the world.

Verse 48, Jesus continues, the one who rejects me and does not receive my words has a judge.

The word that I have spoken will judge him on the last day.

We know that Jesus, Jesus's purpose during his first coming was not to sit in judgment, but to pay the penalty for our sin, to atone for our sin.

But when Jesus comes again, he will judge.

Matthew 25 tells us, when the son of man comes in his glory and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne.

Before him, we will be gathered all the nations and he will separate people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.

And at that time, those who have heard his words and do not respond to it will be judged.

For I have not spoken on my own authority, verse 49, but the father who has sent me has given himself, has himself given me a commandment, what to say and what to speak.

And I know that his commandment is eternal life.

What I say therefore, I say as the father has told me.

Jesus spoke what God commanded him to.

Jesus was sent by God with a mission to accomplish.

Some might even call it a mission impossible.

Jesus came on a mission of what to say and what to speak.

And that mission brought about eternal life.

This Easter season, as just about every church puts out signs of service times and the people puts out signs of service times and things that they've got going on and all the different attractions and things for people to come to church, I would ask you, who are you inviting?

Not to a church service, but into your life?

Who have you been praying for?

Who is God softening your heart towards?

I don't keep talking about this because there's this unsaid quota of people we're trying to reach.

I keep talking about this because as God sent Jesus on mission, Jesus has sent every single one of us to be his hands and feet.

As Paul will say to the Thessalonian church, they were ready to share not only the gospel, but their lives.

Not just the good news, but into their lives, into their community, into their people.

I have a question for us specifically.

When was the last time, and this is rhetorical, when was the last time we had somebody new step into our church?

Congrats, Frank and Joy.

Joy, you got married into the church, so congratulations.

But Jesus has called us to continue onto his mission, to continue to share the message that he gave us.

And again, this isn't about getting a butt in a seat.

This is about us being missional people.

Don't hear this and go, man, who can I, it's Easter this Sunday, who can I bring with me to church?

If you do want to bring someone with you, amazing.

But it's far bigger than one week, because we get to celebrate Easter every single day, every single week that we gather.

We sing about the resurrection of Jesus.

The only thing special about Easter in every church in America is that pretty much everyone who goes to church once a month decides to go on one specific day.

Easter has become more about us than it has about him, than it has about Jesus.

And so don't hear this and go, okay, who do I need to pray the prayer with?

Connor and Kylie, as you're sitting, as you're sitting there and you've got people in your, got their necks in your hands, hey, do you know Jesus?

Crack.

Like, that's, yeah.

That's not, that's not what I'm saying.

But is there anyone in your life who you are witnessing to?

I know I've mentioned the couple who walks the dog in our neighborhood and not much of a difference in our neighborhood and not much ground has been made with that couple yet because they, I swear they're not from here because they walk so fast.

And anytime I say hi, they just, they're not stopping and they're not, anyways, that's neither here nor there.

So not much ground has been made with that couple yet.

But what's crazy is when you and your spouse start praying for opportunities to meet people, to start praying for opportunities to witness to, God will just drop them in your lap.

And for Kayla and I, it came with a couple that we met at RT Lodge, sitting up at the bar and me and this, and, or a couple and the female, we share the same birthday.

And so we were there on my birthday and we're talking and then we're here and next thing you know, we come to know they have a young kid.

We start talking about parenting.

We start talking about family, all these things.

And the other, they come over for dinner.

We go to their birthday party.

Kayla invites them to her and the son to a plate.

Like, and this couple is L-O-S-T lost.

They are in over their heads.

As a lot of us are.

But at least we have an answer.

At least we have a hope and a solution, that being Jesus.

And we are slowly but surely earning the right to share the gospel with them.

They know I'm a pastor.

They asked me that.

And then the conversation after that, once they figured out where I was a pastor, it kind of just slowly drifted off as that happens.

But, still as we hang out with them, as we get together with them, we're getting, we're earning the right for them when they finally open up and ask.

We're earning the right to share the gospel with them.

And it's not, like, next time we hang out with them, I'm not gonna pull up my Bible and share with them the Romans road.

If you don't know what the Romans road is, you can look that up on your own time.

It is very helpful.

But, that's not, that's not, our goal is to share the gospel with them.

But our goal is not, okay, by the third time we get together.

There is none of that.

There is none of that.

But what we do now is we are meeting with them, we're praying for them behind their back, because they haven't asked for prayer yet publicly.

And we know that one day we are going to have the opportunity to share the gospel with them.

It's not today and it won't be next week, but we will stay on mission because that's what Jesus has called us to do.

And that's not just the job of a pastor to do.

That's all of us who are in the light, who have believed in Jesus.

Jesus has afforded us the opportunity to show others that we are in the light.

The opportunity to show others where the light is and who the light is.

You don't have to point to yourself in your life and be like, look at how amazing my life is.

I'm so redeemed, I'm so holy.

No, in fact, we need to show them how broken we are and point them to our Lord and our Savior.

Point them to our hope.

It's not just a pastor's job.

It's not just an elder's job.

If you believe in Jesus, Jesus has given us the opportunity.

To show people to himself.

And so who are you witnessing to?

Because Jesus came as a witness.

If you need me to throw some scripture on it in case you missed, verse 49.

For I have not spoken on my own authority, but the Father who what?

Who sent me has given, has himself given me a commandment.

And that commandment is eternal life.

And as the Father sent the Son, which then came the sent spirit, which now resides in us.

We are his hands and his feet.

We have been sent.

Would you pray with me?

Jesus, we thank you for being the example.

We thank you for being the light.

We thank you for being the atonement of our sins.

That you save us, Jesus.

And we cannot believe that you in fact have given us your same mission.

We thank you that we don't have to be perfect, but we thank you that we can point people to you, Jesus.

Of what you said and what you did.

Father, may all of us, not just on Sundays, but together as married people, as husband and wife.

Would you give us people to, would you put people in our lives?

Would you put people in our lives?

To witness to.

God, would you do it in your way and on your time?

But would you give us the boldness and courage to speak and also the patience and discernment to not just quickly come to a moment where we're asking someone to pray a prayer when they don't even know what that fully means yet.

Father, would you put people in our lives?

May we go on mission.

May we be able to do what we want to do.

May we go on mission, regardless of how prepared or not prepared we might feel we are.

We have your spirit inside of us to lead and guide and direct us.

Father, would you do it for us?

We thank you that you've entrusted us.

We worship you, Jesus, and we thank you for who you are and what you've done.

And it's in Jesus' name everyone said, amen.

Amen.
