---
layout: sermon
title: John 18:28-40
date: 2025-08-03T15:37:37.000Z
category: sermon
audio_url: https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/106425626/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2025-7-4%2F405095811-44100-2-73c51ab53c95b.m4a
duration: 28:12
scripture: John 18:28-40
series: John
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: "Jesus questioned by Pilot and the Jews staying “clean” for Passover."
guid: 58b37336-7beb-4096-a059-e1b31b1e2c68
episode_id: 31a71ead
transcription_model: whisper-large-v3-turbo
---


<p>Jesus questioned by Pilot and the Jews staying “clean” for Passover. </p>

## Transcription

Awesome.

Let's jump back up to verse 28 there. "...

Then they led Jesus from the house of Caiaphas, so the governor's headquarters.

It was early in the morning." So, we don't see this obviously here.

It just says it's early in the morning.

Rome kind of operated on four shifts through the day, and the last two shifts of the night, the fourth one, it ended about 6 a.m.

And the word that they used there for early morning is that word.

I can't remember it off the top of my head.

But anyways, so it was before 6 a.m.

So yeah, pretty early. "...

They themselves did not enter the governor's headquarters so that they would not be defiled, but could eat the Passover." Here in John's Gospel, he skips the entirety of Caiaphas' questioning of Jesus.

The other Gospel accounts will tell us that people came to speak up against Jesus, but their testimonies were either false or they did not add up.

Except for these two people who speak up and say this.

Matthew 22, it says, "...

This man said, I am able to destroy the temple of God and to rebuild it in three days." Of course, these guys are speaking of Jesus.

Jesus said that.

And the high priest stood up and said, "...

Have you no answer to make?

What is it that these men testify against you?" But Jesus remained silent.

And the high priest said to him, "...andjure you by the living God.

Tell us if you are the Christ, the Son of God." Jesus said to him, "...

You have said so, but I tell you from now on you will see the Son of Man seated at the right hand of power and coming on the clouds of heaven." Then the high priest tore his robes and said, "...

He has uttered blasphemy.

What further witness do we need?

You have now heard his blasphemy.

What is your judgment?" They answered, "...

He deserves death." Then they spit in his face and struck him.

And some slapped him, saying, "...

Prophesy to us, you Christ.

Who is it that struck you?" So John skips us that detail in total and just tells us that the Jews brought Jesus to Pilate.

But they did not enter the headquarters because they did not want to be defiled and still wanted to eat Passover.

So they did not want to be unclean and step into the Gentiles' home or his headquarters.

It was not technically his home.

Pilate, his home would be in Caesarea.

But any time that there was a big festival or anything like that, he would make his way down to Jerusalem to be there just in case things got out of line.

So he's at his headquarters in Jerusalem and the Jews did not want to enter it because then they would be with a Gentile and they wanted to remain clean for Passover.

So here they are, about to kill Jesus, but they don't want to defile themselves.

Seems a little contradictory if you ask me.

Verse 29 tells us, "...

So Pilate went outside to them and said, What accusation do you bring against this man?" They answered him, If this man were not doing evil, we would not have delivered him over to you." Okay, let's take a moment here and learn a little bit more about Pilate.

The scriptures, I mean, he's in the Apostles' Creed, right?

Like suffered under Pontius Pilate.

He is obviously a big deal here in this moment, in the role of Jesus as he's going to be crucified.

But let's learn a little bit more about Pilate and we can learn this through a Jewish historian named Josephus.

He gives us kind of three stories about Pilate.

I'm just going to share one.

But Pilate was a Roman prefect or governor who served from AD 26 to 36.

And I'm going to share one story for the sake of time.

Pilate, he had very little care of Jewish law and customs.

And so he brought in flags and banners with the image of Caesar on them.

And the Jews in response to this, a large group of them, came to Caesarea, right?

Because that's where he was actually headquartered.

And they were in protest.

And they just laid on the ground in Caesarea by his headquarters for five days.

They stayed there for five days.

And Pilate called in Roman troops to get them to move and essentially was like, Hey, if you guys don't leave, we're going to kill you.

Well, they stayed there anyways.

And Pilate didn't kill any of them.

So, and then not only that, but he also took down the flags with Caesar's face on them.

And so, Pilate, obviously he didn't care too much about the Jews, but he was also malleable, right?

Like, if you pressed hard enough, he would do whatever you wanted him to do.

So, the Jews didn't like Pilate, Pilate didn't like the Jews, but he would give in to them.

So, here we see now, right?

Verse 29, Pilate went outside to them and said, What accusation do you bring against this man?

They answered him, If this man were doing no evil, he would not have delivered them over to you.

So, again, like we said, it's early in the morning, most likely around like 6 a.m. or so, or before that.

And so, Pilate's like, What do you guys want?

Like, it's early.

He hasn't even had a cup of coffee yet, right?

Like, what do you want?

And verse 31 tells us, Pilate says, Take him yourselves and judge him by your own law.

The Jews said to him, It is not lawful for us to put anyone to death.

Pilate's like, You don't need me.

You have your own law.

Do your own thing.

Like, you don't need me.

But then they say, Well, actually we do because we need you to kill him.

And it was around this time that Rome had actually taken away the ability for Jews to kill.

So, literally they had no ability.

Like, it was unlawful for them, for the Jews, to kill people.

Only Rome could do that.

Verse 32 says, This was to fulfill the word that Jesus had spoken to show by what kind of death he was going to die.

And Jesus revealed to us what kind of death he was going to die in John 12.

John 12, 32.

And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.

He said this to show by what kind of death he was going to die.

Did you notice something?

They're both.

Verse 32.

Coincidence?

I think not.

Okay, so verse 33.

So Pilate entered his headquarters again and called Jesus and said to him, Are you the king of the Jews?

Jesus answered, Do you say this of your own accord, or did others say it to you about me?

Jesus is going like, Pilate, do you believe in me?

Do you believe in me?

Is this, are you coming to faith right now?

Like, uh, is this your, is this your own conclusion?

Uh, Pilate answers, Am I a Jew?

Your own nation and the chief priests have delivered you over to me.

What have you done?

Pilate's like, wait a second.

You're the one on trial.

I'm the one who's asking questions to you.

Why are you here, buddy?

Jesus answered in verse 36, My kingdom is not of this world.

If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would have been fighting, that I might not be delivered over to the Jews, but my kingdom is not of this world.

Jesus is telling Pilate his kingdom is not a direct threat to Rome.

What did these Roman governors care about?

Rome.

And so he sees the Jews, they bring him in.

They're like, they're like, he's a threat.

At this point, Pilate is going, okay, if he's a threat, he must be a threat to Rome.

So what's, what's going on?

And Jesus is like, hey, if I were a threat to you, I, my people would be out fighting.

Would they not?

And, of course, Peter tried, but he's not a very good swordsman.

And so Jesus says, my kingdom is not of this world.

Verse 37, What's Jesus saying here?

Jesus is the king of truth.

Jesus reveals truth.

And whoever listens to Jesus' voice is of the truth.

It almost seems like Jesus is inviting Pilate to be of the truth.

Right?

Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice.

And the other gospel accounts will tell us about Pilate's wife and how she's kind of like listening in on this conversation and she's going like, he's innocent.

He's innocent.

And, but John doesn't give us that account.

So we won't belabor the point.

Pilate said to him, what is truth?

What is truth?

That sounds like a question from the 21st century.

What is truth?

Your truth?

My truth?

The truth?

What is truth?

Pilate just doesn't care.

So he ends this interrogation with what seems to be somewhat of a cynical question.

And why?

We don't know.

Again, maybe he was fed up because it was very early in the morning.

Or maybe he was just annoyed with the Jews.

Either way, he dismisses Jesus in that moment.

Verse 38 continues, After he said this, he went back outside to the Jews and told them, I find no guilt in him.

But you have a custom that I should release one man for you at the Passover.

So do you want me to release to you the king of the Jews?

So Pilate finds no guilt in Jesus.

Which some scholars and people believe that's one of the reasons why Pontius Pilate is included in the Creed and given so much kind of clout throughout the scriptures.

Because it's proving that Jesus was not guilty.

He was innocent.

Right?

Pilate says, I find no guilt in him.

Who was in charge at the time?

The Romans.

So the official authority did not see guilt in Jesus.

Did not find guilt in Jesus.

But, and so, you know, Pilate finds no guilt in Jesus.

And Jesus is no threat to Rome.

And so Pilate's like, alright, come on, let's let this guy off the hook.

And so Pilate gives them an out.

Do you want me to release to you the king of the Jews?

And you could imagine, with the little bit of history that I shared of Pilate, and the history that we know of the Jews, the moment they heard this, they cringed.

They were like, you filthy animal.

Right?

They were like, how dare you call this man king of the Jews?

I'm sure the Jewish officials and leaders who heard that at the time, I mean, we already saw Caiaphas.

He tore his robe, right?

He heard blasphemy.

He tore his robe in just disapproval.

And here is Pilate going like, so you want me to release your king?

I'm sure they loved it.

Verse 40, they cried out again, not this man, but Barabbas.

Now Barabbas was a robber.

They cry out, no, give us Barabbas, who was a criminal, who was a robber.

Other gospel accounts will tell us that he is an insurrectionist.

Barabbas was one worthy of death, right?

He was literally trying to fight Rome.

He was trying to fight the people in charge.

And here is Jesus, innocent, no guilt, no threat to Rome.

But isn't that like our God, to take the spot of a guilty man while he is innocent?

As we begin to wrap up this morning, I want to spend our last few minutes because there was a line in the scripture that we read that I believe I just couldn't get over it all week.

Verse 28, they themselves, again speaking of the Jews, the religious leaders, the Pharisees, the Sanhedrin.

They did not enter the governor's headquarters so that they would not be defiled, but could eat Passover.

That they would not be defiled.

They would not become unclean, but could eat the Passover.

Do you think that these Jews, when they finally got home, they took off their work robes, they sat down at the table with their family and friends to begin celebrating their Passover?

Do you think God was pleased with their sacrifice?

Do you think it was an honorable time of worship to the Lord?

My guess would be no.

Because as Jesus told the parable or the story of the cup that was clean on the outside but dirty on the inside, that's what they were.

They did not want to become unclean and cross-contaminate themselves with a Gentile, with a Roman, but they were happy to crucify Jesus.

It reminds me of a text in Isaiah where the prophet Isaiah says to the Lord on behalf of the people.

He says in Isaiah 64, We have all become like one who is unclean, and all of our righteous deeds are like polluted garment." That phrase there, polluted garment, is a very nice way of saying menstrual rags.

What's the prophet saying?

We have all become like one who is unclean, and all of our righteous deeds, what they seem to be as righteous, are like menstrual rags.

Do you think God desires menstrual rags?

Do you think God desires worship and righteous deeds that are like menstrual rags?

No, that's what our works are to God.

That's what our thing, the stuff that we bring to God, the stuff that we bring to the table, are like polluted garments when our hearts are not softened towards Him.

Our works, it is pointless, it is worthless when our hearts are not like our psalm this morning.

One thing I have asked of the Lord, that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to gaze upon the beauty of the Lord and to inquire in His temple.

God, there is just one thing I ask, one thing I seek.

Can I dwell with you?

Can I be in your house forever?

Can I just be in your presence?

Can I just gaze at your beauty, Father?

Have you found yourself in quick judgmentalism towards other people?

Like, I just can't stand it when they do this.

Why do they do this?

Why do they act this way?

Why are they this way?

Why won't they?

Are you overly proud of your own moral achievements?

Are you overly proud of your own moral achievements?

Like, man, we're doing great this Sunday.

We did family church four times this week.

Man, I'm crushing it.

God loves me so much.

I'm doing so, I'm doing such a good job.

Do you find yourself in worship criticizing lyrics?

Are they not deep enough?

Are they not profound enough?

I just wish the font size was a little bit bigger.

I just wish I knew exactly what we were singing next instead of everything being all on one screen.

Or maybe it's a, can we just get over this?

Can we just get, just get to the message?

Let's just get to the good part.

Are you checking your went to church box this weekend, this morning?

Are you just here to check a box?

Why are you coming in here acting like everything is fine when you and your spouse were in a fight in the car on the way to church?

Let me ask a more blanket statement.

Where are you comfortable with your sin?

Where are you comfortable with your sin?

A nicer way to put it would be, where are your blind spots?

I like the harsher way.

Where are you comfortable with your sin?

You see, the Pharisees, they were okay with crucifying Jesus.

But there's no way they could step foot in with a Gentile.

We can look at them and go, yeah, that's messed up.

But we've got our own stuff that we are okay with.

That is like menstrual rags to our Father.

And you might fool us here in this room, but your Heavenly Father, who all of this is for, is not tricked.

David says this in Psalm 51.

He says, Just a reminder, Psalm 51.

This is David's psalm of confession, of repentance, not after he's slept with Bathsheba, then has her husband killed on the line of battle.

But this psalm comes after an interaction, a confrontation with Nathan the prophet.

And what does David say in this psalm of repentance?

For you will not delight in sacrifice.

Why will he not delight in the sacrifice of David?

Because he is unclean.

He has been living in sin.

And so, the Lord does not delight in this sacrifice, or he would give it.

He is not pleased with his burnt offering.

Why?

Because he is unclean.

He is impure.

And so, what does David say?

The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and contrite heart.

Oh God, you will not despise.

God is not interested in our unclean sacrifices.

God knows we are unclean.

God knows we are imperfect.

God knows that we fall short.

That's why he sent his son.

So what does he want from us?

He wants a broken spirit.

God, I know I'm unworthy.

But I'm coming to you as I am, knowing that you are changing me from the inside out.

God, I know I'm in sin.

Would you reveal it to me?

God, I know I am broken.

My spirit is broken.

And thank you, God, that you do not despise a broken spirit.

So bring your brokenness to God.

Bring your broken heart to God.

That's our sacrifice unto him.

If at any point in these last few minutes, you've thought to yourself, man, I wish blank would hear this.

You missed it.

Man, I wish so-and-so would hear this, because they're really X, Y, Z on my nerves.

You missed it.

You missed the whole point.

And you, my friend, are the Pharisee who tried to kill Jesus.

But you would not defile yourself and make it home in time for Passover.

You are guilty of sin, and you don't see it.

And I pray that the Lord would reveal it to you.

This week, as I was in preparation for this message, as I was going through this last part, I was in tears, weeping before the Lord, revealing myself to him.

I was shook.

Kayla saw me, she was like, are you okay?

Are you okay?

We all have stuff going on.

We all have brokenness that's within us that needs to be dealt with.

Again, calling from Psalm 51, David says, Against you and only you, Lord, have I sinned.

Of course, his sin affected other people.

But ultimately, our sin is against God.

Who's the one who set the law?

Who created the law?

Our Lord.

And so this morning, we're going to take a moment and respond through song and worship.

But we're not going to rush into it.

I don't want to rush into singing.

We have some time.

I want us to just take a moment between you and your Father.

Take a moment and ask for conviction.

If there is a blind spot, would you pray?

God, reveal to me my blind spot.

Reveal to me where I am comfortable with my own sin.

Ask for conviction.

Ask for forgiveness.

Repent.

And respond to your Savior through praise and worship with a broken spirit.

If you need to kneel, go and do that.

If you need to bow, do that.

If you need to cry out, do that.

I don't care how you respond in this moment, but let it be between you and the Lord.

Not the ones of us in this room.

Take a moment and respond with a sincere and broken heart.

Father, would you create in us a pure heart.

Reveal to us our blind spots in places where we've failed.

Where we've judged.

Where we've judged.

Where there is unresolved anger.

Where there is resentment.

Where there is impurity.

Anything that we have gotten comfortable with, Lord.

But it breaks your heart.

Show it to us, Lord.

So that we might be more surrendered to you.

To you.
