---
layout: sermon
title: Genesis 1:3-2:3
date: 2026-06-14T13:10:26.000Z
category: sermon
audio_url: https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/121503681/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2026-5-15%2F426174134-44100-2-24ada1a4d9fb3.m4a
duration: "39:13"
scripture: Genesis 1:3-2:3
series: Genesis
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: In this sermon, we cover the creation of the world and see how God turns chaos into beauty.
guid: e69a8707-991b-4098-ba53-b09842aa9283
episode_id: 27eab1ff
transcription_model: whisper-cpp-large-v3-q5
---


## Transcription

Thank you for being here and I was in the middle of preparing for the preaching this week and yeah my heart was just like filled with gratitude and yeah I was just so grateful for what I get to do and I love getting to preach and teach and like I love the Word of God and so I find it an honor and a privilege and so thank you for your generosity and for allowing me to preach and to do this it really is quite a joy so thank you.

We are in the second week now of Genesis and man there's just so much so it's like a.m. p.m. too much good stuff that's a I don't think there's a.m. p.m.s out here at any rate yeah sorry it's a maybe it's a West Coast thing I just I just exposed myself you're not you're not from these parts I got a question for us this morning as we dive into the text how do you approach the first pages of Scripture how do you approach the creation story how you typically read the first pages of the Bible you might be familiar with the old proverb familiarity breeds contempt familiarity breeds contempt which essentially means the more you know about something or someone the more likely you are to notice its flaws which can lead to a loss of respect and appreciation and I think this is the problem for a lot of us who have become so familiar with just the first pages of the Bible that we often just breathe by it we just are like yeah the creation story like we picture the children's Bible we picture the little pictures and the animals and we picture all the all the cute things which are true and amazing but we just feel like yes it's the creation like yeah cool and then you know they think there's creation and then there's humans and then there's all the and then Adam and Eve and then the serpent in the garden and then we get to Cain and Abel and that's when things really get good you know or I guess bad but at any rate so instead of being in awe and in wonder of the Creator we determine in our and now we go like what was it's a six day creation or is modern science right and saying the earth is billions of years old we completely move the goalposts we completely missed the point and last week as we started Genesis we looked at the first two verses and that was my goal to reintroduce you to the point remind you of the point of scriptures scriptures I believe along with the historical Christian faith believe that the scriptures are the very word of God and how else then do we know God and through his word and all it takes is the first four words on the first page for us to be introduced to him to be introduced to God last week we talked about how it has been the historical Christian perspective that Moses wrote the book of Genesis and so now of course he was not there Moses doesn't show up until the book of Exodus but it is believed that inspired by the Holy Spirit he wrote spoke and gave the Israelites their history and not just a history from their exiled present but a history from the very beginning and so the Bible begins Genesis begins in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth this sentence is filled with mystery it's filled with power creativity and wonder and also shows us that God's creation has beginning but God does not God is outside of time God is out of his world and God speaks to Israel later in Scripture and says in Isaiah for I am God and there is no other I am God and there is none like me declaring the end from the beginning from ancient times things not yet done God describes himself as declaring the end from the beginning which might be getting a little ahead of myself here but like let's think about creation as he is creating all things he speaks and they are formed he speaks and the earth is in the perfect spot for human flourishing close to the Sun so we would burn and not too far away that we would freeze he put our home in the perfect spot declaring the end from the beginning and from ancient things in ancient times things not yet done God is eternal he's outside of our time and space and yet when we get to verse 2 it shows it's dark and voided and it's their space and the Spirit of God is present within his creation in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth Genesis 1 1 then verse 2 the earth was without form and void and darkness was over the face of the deep and the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters we serve a God who is not distant or far off but is present within his creation even in the darkness God is not like a grand watchmaker who sets things into motion and then just steps away clocks out if you will thanks who sets things into motion and steps away and then is off to do the next thing no that is not at all we see of the God of the Bible especially in Genesis we will constantly see God move and intervene because of his promise which is his word in the midst of sin in the midst of darkness and his people okay so this morning I'm gonna give kind of a 30,000 foot view of creation and then we will dive kind of into each creation day and look at it a little more deeply so let me read these first two verses for us again and then we will look at creation from a more holistic view and then go day by day so uh verses wanted to in the beginning God created the heavens in the earth the earth was without form and void darkness was over the face of the deep and the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters and so here we see that you know whatever earth is and in this kind of current state there's darkness it's without form and void so we have this without form and void and then there's darkness and within the first three days of creation those problems the formlessness the voidness and the darkness all disappear the first three days of creation wipe out all of these problems completely okay so day one God said let there be light and God said let there be light and there was light so the darkness we saw in verse 2 which is the word of the Lord darkness is now gone and it has its proper place and it was good so that's day one we get light and day and night then day two he separates the waters from the waters he makes the sky and heavens but for reading let's read verse six and God said let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters and let it separate the waters from the waters and God made the expanse and separated the waters that were under the expanse from the waters that were above the expanse and it was so and God called the expanse heaven and there was evening and there was morning the second day but notice it was not good yet he had he creates he separates the waters from the waters but it doesn't say it's good until day three where he creates dry land and earth and seas and plants and vegetation and fruit trees so here we are verse nine and God said let the waters under the heavens be gathered together in one place and with the dry land appear and it was so God called the dry land earth the waters that were gathered together he called the seas and God saw that it was good now it's good because the earth was without form and void and now the earth is formed we see the earth formed and it's in its entire state which is kind of the main thing that we see about God and these for other than his incredible creation if we kind of take a step back and look from a more 30,000 foot view a macro level we see that God forms God forms God brings about form and order in his creation but not only does he form he fills day for we see the Sun the moon and the stars read with me verse 14 and God said let there be lights in the expanse of the heavens and separate day from the night and let them be for signs and for seasons and for days and for years and let them be light in the expanse of the heavens to give light upon the earth and it was so and God said make the two great lights the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night and the stars and God set them in the expanse of the heavens to give light on the earth to rule over the day and over the night and to separate the light from the darkness and God saw that it was good and God set them in the expanse of the heavens to give light on the earth to rule over the day and over the night and to separate the light from the darkness and God saw that it was good and there was evening and there was morning the fourth day so we see that good and there was evening and there was morning the fourth day so we see that God begins to fill what he created on day one right light day night Sun stars then day five God creates sea creatures and birds read with me verse 20 and God said but the water swarm with the waters of living creatures and the bird and let birds fly above the earth across the expanse of the heavens so God created the great sea creatures and every living creature that moves with which the water swarm according to their kinds and every winged bird according to its kind and God saw that it was good and God blessed them saying be fruitful and multiply and fill the waters and the seas and let the birds multiply on the earth and there was evening and there was morning the fifth day so on day five we get these sea creatures and birds and then on day six we get livestock land animals and humans let's reverse 24 and God said let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds livestock and creeping things and beasts of the earth according to their kinds and it was so and God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds and the livestock according to their kinds and everything that creeps on the ground according to its kind and God saw that it was good then God said let us make men in our image after our likeness and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and of the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the ground so God created man in his own image in the image of God he created him male and moves on the earth and God said behold I have given you every plant yielding seed that is on the face of all the earth and every tree with seed and its fruit you shall have them for food to every beast of the earth into every bird of the heavens into everything that creeps on the earth everything that has breath of life i have given you every green plant for food and it was so and god saw everything that he made and behold it was very good there was evening and there was morning the sixth day day so so god forms the earth he formed it he put it all in its proper place and then he filled the earth This creation narrative, it's so beautiful and so intentional and ordered, right?

What he formed on day one, he fills on day four.

On day two, he separates the waters from the waters.

And then he creates, on day five, he fills it with sea creatures for the waters below and birds for the waters above.

And then on day three, he creates dry land and earth and separates the earth from the seas.

And there's plants and vegetation and fruit trees.

And so on day six, he fills that space with livestock and land animals and humans.

God is so orderly and knows the end from the beginning.

This is just beautiful.

So now let's dive into these creation days.

And...

But we need to notice the structure of the words of God.

So let's jump back to verse three.

And God said, Let there be light, and there was light.

And God saw that the light was good.

And God separated the light from the darkness.

God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night.

And there was evening and there was morning, the first day.

The first thing I want us to catch is this first verb.

And God said, and God said.

Other writers and scriptures will say, the psalmist says in Psalm 33 verse 9, For he spoke and it came to be.

He commanded and it stood firm.

Colossians 1 verse 16 through 17, For by him all things were created in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities, all things were created through him and for him, and he is before all things, and in him all things hold together.

So first we get, and God said, and then there was.

So we get this, and God said, let there be light, and there was.

These two phrases, and God said, and then there was, are using the same Hebrew verb which means to be, which is closely related to the holy name of God, Yahweh, which is the name God uses when he reveals himself to Moses in Exodus 3.14.

Moses asked God, Well, who should I say you are?

And God replies, I am who I am.

Or another way to translate it will be, I will be that which I will be.

God says to Moses, I am who I am.

And here in creation, we see God say, Let there be, and there was.

There's some really cool wordplay that's happening here.

God is showing Israel that the word of the Lord is the powerful, transforming word that has been since before the beginning of time.

Something else that we see from God in the first verse, in the very first thing he created, is that God divides.

Or God separates.

And God separates light from darkness.

And we see this, all this theme, all throughout the scriptures.

In Leviticus, in Israel's law, the Lord would make divisions between what is holy and what is profane.

We see this in Leviticus 10.10.

You are distinguished between the holy and the common, between the unclean and the clean.

So we see God is a God who divides, or He separates.

Then within the tabernacle and the temple, there was a division between the holy place and the most holy place.

And we even see God separates Israel from other nations.

Leviticus 20 verse 26, You shall be holy to me, for I, the Lord, am holy, and have separated you from the peoples, that you should be mine.

What's the point for you and me?

God desires His people to be set apart.

God desires His people to be different than the world around us.

What does Jesus say in the Sermon on the Mount?

You are to be the light of the world.

A city set on a hill cannot be hidden, nor do people light a lamp and put it under a basket but on a stand, and it gives light to all in the house in the same way.

Let your light shine before others so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father in heaven.

We are called to be light, and light all throughout Scripture represents holiness, purity, and truth.

The Psalmist says, Your Word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path.

The Word of God is illuminating a path of righteousness.

And we are to live by His Word, set apart and different than the world around us.

If you are a Jesus follower, your eternity is not the only thing that has changed.

It ought to be your whole operating system.

Your whole operating system changed the moment you believed in Jesus Christ.

He changes the way we think about everything.

And unfortunately, we don't live that way consistently.

But thank the Lord, He's given us His grace and His mercy to cover us and separate us from our sins as far as the East is from the West.

But what a beautiful reminder for us today that even in creation, God was showing that He is a God who divides, who sets apart, who separates.

And not only does He separate the light and the darkness, but He called the light Day and the darkness He called Night.

And in the ancient Near East, naming things was an act of sovereign dominion.

So God is not only showing the Israelites that He separates, but that He has sovereign dominion over what He creates.

He rules and reigns what He creates.

God is the sovereign ruler, and in the same way God divides night and day, He creates a division within the waters.

Let's read.

Genesis 1, verses 6-8.

And God said, Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and let us separate the waters from the waters.

And God made the expanse and separated the waters that were under the expanse from the waters that were above the expanse, and it was so.

And God called the expanse Heaven.

There was evening, there was morning, the second day.

So on the second day, God created an expanse in the atmosphere to separate the waters from above, from the waters below.

That word expanse, when used throughout other parts of Scripture, it describes a tent curtain or veil.

So with the creation of the expanse, God sent, God set a division between the clouds above and the waters below.

Then God again names the heavens.

And pagan mythology considered the heavens to be ruled by the high gods, but according to this, God not only created the heavens, but also controlled it by making a division in it.

God is showing the Israelites that their Lord is the supreme God of the heavens.

God is essentially flexing on all these little g gods, and is showing these Israelites and us today how majestic, how powerful, and mighty and beautiful he is.

The other day I was watching a kind of silly video, but he was traveling through the Grand Canyon.

And tears started to well up in my eyes, as I was just seeing on my TV, the beauty of God's creation.

David was right when he wrote in Psalm 19-1, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the sky above proclaims his handiwork.

Let's continue, Day 3, starting in verse 9, And God said, Let the waters of the waters under the heaven be gathered together in one place, and let the dry land appear.

And it was so.

God called the dry land earth, and the waters that were gathered together he called seas.

And God saw that it was good.

And God said, Let the earth sprout vegetation, and plants yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit, and which is their seed, each according to its kind on the earth.

And it was so.

The earth brought forth vegetation, plants yielding seed according to their own kinds, and trees bearing fruit.

And it was so.

The earth brought forth vegetation, plants yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit, and which is their seed, each according to its kind on the earth.

And God saw that it was good.

And there was evening and there was morning, the third day.

Okay, so we have the waters being gathered together, which creates the seas, and dry land appears, and boom, here is our home, earth.

And it was good.

Then also on Day 3, we see the earth begin to sprout vegetation, and plants yielding seed, and a fruit tree bearing fruit with seed.

Each according to their kind.

And as we read verse 11, verse 13, you probably began to see there was this cadence and repetition of each according to their kind.

And it's a description of natural order as well as uniqueness, natural in a sense that vegetation, plants, and fruit trees all reproduce whatever it is, it's almost as if things are the way they are because God made it so.

And to the original audience then, and to us today, we should be clear that things are the way they are because God spoke it into existence, from the natural food that we eat, the whole food that we eat, from trees we see, right?

There isn't a banana tree popping out coconuts.

That's not how it works.

Banana trees reproduce bananas, coconuts, coconuts, pineapples, pineapples.

That is ordained by God from the beginning of time.

Okay, Day 4, start of verse 14.

And God said, Let there be a light in the expanse of the heavens to separate the day from the night.

And let them be for signs and for seasons and for days and years, and let them be lights in the expanse of the heavens to give light upon the earth.

And it was so.

And God said, And God made the two great lights, the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night and the stars.

And God set them in the expanse of the heavens to give light upon the earth to rule over the day and over the night and to separate the light from the darkness.

And God saw that it was good.

And there was evening and there was morning, the fourth day.

Now, if you are an astrologer, you begin to ask the question, how could there be light on day one, but no sun?

Because the sun comes on day four, and there's many ways we can interpret this, and I'm not going to give you the full exhaustive list, but I'm just going to highlight a few for funsies.

So maybe the sun and the moon and the stars were created.

And just simply needed to be brought into its place, right?

Like that's not simple, but of course to God, it is.

Maybe the sun and the moon and stars appeared for the first time.

Maybe the first three days of creation had light, and it was a different light, right?

Like in Revelation, we see God is the light.

Or maybe...

They were there, but now only were they given their true name and purpose.

As the text says, for signs, and for seasons, for days, and for years.

Who knows?

An interesting note here is that we don't get the name sun, moon, and stars, and that's intentional.

The mythology of pagans would have worshipped the sun, would have worshipped the moon, and the stars, and looked to them for answers and deeper purpose.

And, I mean, we get this today, too, right?

Like, you've probably heard the phrase, Oh, and the stars just aligned.

Like they have some sort of power, or some sort of function beyond what God gave them to be.

And here, in the text, we see the God of Israel say, There is a greater light, and there's a lesser light.

There ain't no sun God, no moon God, but all creation attests to his glory, and he rules over it all.

Let's continue.

Verse 20.

And God said, Let the waters swarm with waters of living creatures, and let the birds fly above the earth, across the expanse of the heavens.

So God created the great sea creatures, and every living creature that moves with which the waters swarm according to their kinds, and every winged bird according to its kind.

And God saw that it was good.

And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the sea, and let the birds multiply on the earth.

And there was evening and there was morning, the fifth day.

So now in this Day 5, God creates life in the sea and the sky.

So God created all living creatures that are in the sea and fly across the skies.

And something to note here is that this passage declares that life came into existence, sorry, that life came into being by the direct command of God.

That life came into being by the direct command of God.

Okay, let's turn our attention to Day 6, starting with verse 24.

And God said, Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds.

Livestock and creeping things and beasts of the earth according to their kinds.

And it was so.

And God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds, and the livestock according to their kinds, and everything that creeps on the ground according to its kind.

And God saw that it was good.

Now as we start Day 6, we turn to Day 6.

Day 6 begins with the creation of land animals, each according to their kind.

And you might not have been counting, but this is the seventh time that we get, if you look at verse 24, And God said.

This is the seventh time that it says, And God said.

Seven is an important number.

The number seven is typically known as the number of completion, right?

On the seventh day, God rests.

Even in Hebrew, the first verse of Genesis 1-1 is seven words, right?

Like God created the heavens and the earth.

In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth.

That's seven, seven words.

It's an important, it's an important number.

But, his creation, here in the context of his creation, we get a slight difference as we continue on and we read verse 26.

Instead of, And God said, we get, Then God said.

And this is a small difference, but what does it show us?

That there's something different about this next creation.

He goes, And let there be light.

And, and, and, and, and, and, and, then.

Small difference, but there's something different about this next creation.

Verse 26.

Then God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness, and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the heavens, and over the livestock, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps on the ground.

So God created man in his own image.

In the image of God, he created him.

Male and female, he created them.

And God blessed them, and God said to them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the heavens, and over every living thing that moves on the earth.

And God said, Behold, I have given you every plant-yielding seed that is on the face of the earth, and every tree with seed in its fruit, and you shall have them for food.

And to every beast of the earth, and to every bird of the heavens, and to everything that creeps on the earth, everything that has breath of life, I have given every green plant for food.

And it was so.

And God saw that everything that he made, and behold, it was very good.

And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.

What does it mean to be created in the image of God?

When we look into the original audience, in ancient Near East cultures, only the king bore the image of God.

Only the king would have been made in God's likeness.

And here, you have not just the king being made in the image of God, but Adam, and all that would come from Adam, bear the image of God.

This would have been legendary, revolutionary, to the now freed Jewish slaves.

They are all royal image bearers.

Their value was once in what they could accomplish.

But now, their value came from Creator God.

Their value was no longer in what they did, but in a who.

In the God who rescued them and saved them.

But we also see as God formed the earth in days 1-3, and then filled the earth in days 4-6.

We see God make man in his own image, after his likeness.

And God gives man a kingly role in creation.

We see God command man to rule and have dominion over the fish of the sea.

Birds in the air and every living thing.

That is the forming work.

And then he tells man to be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth.

So just as God formed and filled all creation, man as his image bearers are to form and rule over every living thing and fill the earth with babies.

God has finished creating and he saw everything that he had made.

And it was very good.

And now we get to Day 7, Genesis 2, verses 1-3.

Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the hosts of them.

And on the seventh day God finished his work that he had done, and he rested on the seventh day through all his work that he had done.

So God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it God rested from all his work that he had done in creation.

God's finished task is sealed in the words, He rested.

Rested literally means ceased.

It is a rest of achievement, not inactivity.

Right?

Like God wasn't just like laid back on the couch.

No, he nurtures what he creates.

He is the creator, and he nurtures what he creates.

We could compare the symbolism to Jesus, who is seated at the right hand of the Father after his work.

Finished work of redemption.

But we also see on the seventh day, God not only ceased from his work of creation, but he also sanctified the seventh day.

He called it holy.

Israel was to be set, was to set apart one day in seven to worship and serve the Lord.

Not simply to engage in common relaxation and entertainment.

It was a reminder that they, the nation of Israel, were God's creation.

That they were God's holy nation.

The day belonged to him.

To be set apart for him and to rest in him.

So all this creation, all the details, and yet all the mystery, what's the point?

God, by his powerful word, transforms the chaos into a holy and blessed nation.

Right?

Verse 2.

The earth was without form and void, and there was darkness over the face of the waters.

And what do we see God do by the end of his creation?

It is very good.

It is no longer dark.

It is no longer without, well I guess it's dark.

But, as God says it's dark.

It's no longer without form.

It's no longer void.

But it is filled, and it is very good.

His powerful word transforms the chaos into a holy and blessed creation.

And isn't that what God is still doing today?

He takes us, broken, messed up, chaotic people, and through his word and the works of his Son, Jesus Christ, he transforms our chaos into a holy and blessed creation.

Here's what we can learn from the creation account.

First, that God is a redeeming God who changes. darkness to light, death to life, and chaos to blessing.

God is a redeeming God who changes darkness to light, death to life, and chaos to blessing.

Next, we can learn that God is sovereign over all life, even our idols.

God is absolutely sovereign over all life, even our idols.

The worldly ideas that will contend for our allegiance, God is sovereign over them.

And lastly, that God works by his powerful word to create, to redeem, and to sanctify.

That is what God does for every single person who puts their faith and hope in Jesus Christ.

He redeems you from your life of sin, and rebellion against him.

He creates in you a clean heart.

He removes a heart of stone, turns it into a heart of flesh.

And he puts his spirit inside you to sanctify you and will transform you.

That's what God will do for those who put their faith and hope and trust in him.

If you have not put your faith in Jesus Christ, I pray that you would repent of your sins, which means you turn from your ways, towards God.

I pray that you would repent and believe in Jesus Christ, that it is in him and him alone who saves and redeems.

You cannot and you will not save yourself.

Your time is now to repent and believe.

Would you pray with me?

God, I thank you for your powerful word.

Even from the very first pages of the Bible, you show us how you create, how you redeem and sanctify.

You show us how you transform chaos into a holy and blessed creation.

We thank you that you are faithful to do that in those whom you have saved.

We ask that you would do that in us.

We pray these things in Jesus' name.

And everyone said, Amen.

Let's stand and respond to the goodness of the Gospel by singing together.
