---
layout: sermon
title: Acts 26
date: "2026-05-03T14:05:47.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/119458555/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2026-4-4%2F423431364-44100-2-28a1c014dc84c.m4a"
duration: "26:39"
scripture: Acts 26
series: Acts
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: In this week’s sermon we cover Acts 26. We see Paul’s defense in front of King Agrippa before he is sent to Rome.
guid: 7e975188-c4c4-441e-8d1d-ed7918c6763e
episode_id: f4017b5c
transcription_model: whisper-cpp-large-v3-q5
---

<p>In this week’s sermon we cover Acts 26. We see Paul’s defense in front of King Agrippa before he is sent to Rome. </p>


## Transcription

Well good morning to you.

I hope you've had a great week and wanted to remind you that we have our prayer and worship gathering this upcoming Wednesday and it should be a great time.

We're actually going to be praying through Psalm 23 and so I'm looking forward to that and us praying and reading the Scriptures together.

Psalm 23 should be a grand old time, but this morning we find ourselves in Acts 26.

Acts 26, that's where we are this morning, and we've spent a few weeks now following Paul's imprisonment in Caesarea.

So after an incident with the Jewish leaders in Jerusalem, Paul was put in prison and then tried under the Roman governor Felix.

And Paul was in prison for two years until a new governor Festus was installed.

And last week we looked at Acts 25.

Imagine that, we're in Acts 26 this week, and so last week that would have put us in Acts chapter 25, which showed us governor Festus dealing with the Jews who were still trying to kill Paul after two years of imprisonment, and they're still trying to kill Paul.

And they were willing to kill him legally through the Roman government or we see from chapter 25 that they were willing to kill Paul via ambush.

So they were willing to break the law to kill him or through the law to kill him.

The goal was to kill.

So Paul was on trial with Festus, and before things got squirrely, Paul says, I appeal to Caesar, which means that Paul wanted to be on trial before the Roman Emperor, who would have been Nero at the time.

And since Festus approved Paul's appeal, Festus had to send Paul to Rome, but he needed to send him with a letter.

And so that's why King Agrippa was called to hear Paul and help Festus write his letter to Nero, which is where we find ourselves this morning in Acts 26, and we see Paul before King Agrippa.

So let's turn there and we'll read the first 11 verses.

So Agrippa said to Paul, ‭ ‬You have permission to speak for yourself.‭ ‬ Paul stretched out his hand and made his defense.

I consider myself fortunate that it is before you, King Agrippa, I'm going to make my defense today against all the accusations of the Jews, especially because you are familiar with all the customs and controversies of the Jews.

Therefore I beg you to listen to me patiently.

My manner of life from my youth, spent from the beginning, among my own nation and in Jerusalem, is known by all the Jews.

They have known for a long time, if they are willing to testify, that according to the strictest party of our religion I have lived as a Pharisee.

And now I stand here on trial because of my hope and the promise made by God to our fathers, to which our twelve tribes hope to attain as they earnestly worship night and day.

And for this hope I am accused by Jews, so King, why is it thought incredible by any of you that God raises the dead?

I myself was convinced that I ought to do many things in opposing the name of Jesus of Nazareth, and I did so in Jerusalem.

I not only locked up many of the saints in prison after receiving authority from the chief priests, but when they were put to death I cast my vote against them, and I punished them often in all the synagogues and tried to make them blaspheme.

And in raging fury against them, I persecuted them even to foreign cities.

So Paul, what we see here is he begins his defense, and yes, Paul is not on trial, but by all accounts he is defending himself and giving a proper response to the authorities and is really trying to put his best foot forward.

So Paul begins with his remarks by addressing King Agrippa with gratitude, he says, Which I consider myself fortunate to be up here before you this morning.

I consider myself fortunate is what Paul says, then Paul compliments Agrippa's competence in Jewish law and life, you are familiar with all the customs and controversies, and then Paul asks Agrippa to listen to him patiently.

Paul is saying it might take him a while to make his point.

And if it were me, if I were Paul in this moment, I might throw in a joke and be like, okay, this one time I was preaching and this kid fell asleep and then he fell out of the window and died, but don't worry, he's fine now.

Everything's going to be okay, just wait patiently.

That's what I would have said if I was Paul, but he skipped jokes.

At any rate, Paul begins to give some of his background.

He explains how he was raised a Jew, he was trained and lived as a Pharisee, then Paul even makes a comment, says, if they are willing to testify, which is a really kind of interesting statement, that we could assume from that statement that some of the men maybe even present there in this trial and in this moment where Paul is before King Agrippa, they personally knew Paul and they could be witnesses to him being a Pharisee and being a devout man of the law, but that they wouldn't.

So we see some Pharisees that they would rather stay silent than admit their former association with Paul.

Very interesting.

Verse 6, And now I stand here on trial because of my hope in the promise made by God to our fathers.

So what Paul is beginning to do here, and then through verse 9, we see he is connecting the works of Jesus Christ to the forefathers, to the 12 tribes, so he's going all the way back to Genesis and saying that this Jesus, he connects to our forefathers.

He calls it the hope.

Hope in the promise.

And we see in verse 8, he is specifically referring to the hope of the resurrection and eternal life, and that is then specifically found in Jesus Christ.

So clearly stated here, the bulk of the argument that Paul is making has to do with Jesus.

We see that the bulk of the argument of Paul against the Jews fully has to do with Jesus.

Paul believes that Jesus is the hope of Israel that is found throughout all of the Old Testament scriptures has become a reality in and through Jesus Christ.

Jesus was raised from the dead, and he is the promised Savior and the restorative hope, not just for Israel, but for the whole world.

And I could point to a few passages in the Old Testament, if you would like a list, I can give them to you after, but for time's sake, we're just going to look at Isaiah 25, verse 8, that says, He will swallow up death forever, and the Lord will wipe away tears from all faces, and the reproach of his people he will take away from all the earth, for the Lord has spoken.

So King Agrippa, he would have been familiar with Jewish tradition and beliefs, and any of the Jerusalem leaders who were present at the time would have known what and who Paul was referring to and arguing.

Like Paul usually did when sharing his testimony, he shares how he put Jesus' followers in prison, persecuted them to foreign cities, and then he shares about his trip to Damascus.

So let's jump back in Acts 26, starting in verse 12, In this connection I journeyed to Damascus with the authority and commission of the chief priests at midday, O King, I saw in the way a light from heaven brighter than the sun that shone around me and those who journeyed with me.

And when he had fallen to the ground, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language, Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?

Is it hard for you to kick against the goats?

And I said, Who are you, Lord?

And the Lord said, I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.

But rise and stand upon your feet, for I have appeared to you for this purpose, to appoint you as a servant and witness to the things in which you have seen and those in which I will appear to you, delivering you from your people and from the Gentiles to whom I am sending you, to open their eyes so that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a place among those who are sanctified by faith in me.

There have been multiple times now throughout the book of Acts where we have seen Paul share this story, share his testimony, share him coming really face to face with Jesus Christ, his story of Christ saving him and bringing him from death to life.

And Paul gives this, gives us some subtle details, additions that do not alter the story but add more depth and more detail.

Specifically, we get Jesus' words to him.

First he mentions there in Hebrew, and again he's talking to King Agrippa, and so King Agrippa would have associated, he's talking to him in Hebrew as it being something of a truer sense, or referring to the God of Israel.

But then we also see that he, specifically, we get Jesus' words to him after he has been blinded by that heavenly light and he has fallen to the ground, and the words of Jesus are, Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?

Is it hard for you to kick against the goads?

Which that last question, is it hard for you to kick against the goads?

That is a new addition that we have from the previous times of Paul sharing his story and the actual telling of Paul's story.

And Luke is giving us these words, and this is a phrase that describes the struggle of a beast or animal against the direction of the driver or rider of this animal.

In other words, the voice of Jesus told Paul not to resist God or work in the opposite direction of God.

It's like if you were trying to steer maybe a steering wheel without power steering, which I have done before once in my life.

I had a car that didn't have power steering and it was pretty hard to turn it.

But imagine turning that against power steering, but then you've also got somebody or something in the car that's pulling the steering wheel in the opposite direction, right?

The car is working against you, and then there's this other force working against you.

And that's what Paul is saying, or that's what Jesus is saying to Paul.

He's saying you are working against the will of God.

But God in his grace blinded Saul, Paul, and changed his course.

Then Jesus continues to tell Paul that he is not just persecuting these people, but he is in fact persecuting Jesus himself.

Verse 16, but rise and stand up.

This persecuting would happen no more, but Paul was now to be a servant and witness to the things he had seen.

That Jesus would lead Paul to open people's eyes and to turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a place with those who are in Christ.

When Jesus saved you, he opened your eyes.

You returned from darkness to light, no longer under the power of Satan, but alive in the power of God.

You've received forgiveness of sins, and you have a place with Jesus Christ, and that is good news.

Let's continue, Verse 19, Therefore, O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, but declared first to those in Damascus, then in Jerusalem, and throughout all the region of Judea, and also to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, performing deeds in keeping with their repentance.

For this reason the Jews seized me in the temple and tried to kill me.

To this day I have had the help that comes from God, and so I stand here testifying both to small and great, saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses said would come to pass, that the Christ must suffer, and that by being the first to rise from the dead, he would proclaim light both to our people and to the Gentiles.

So Paul, after telling Agrippa his road to Damascus transformation says, I was not disobedient to this heavenly vision and this heavenly voice that I heard when I went to Damascus, but I in fact went to Damascus.

Then to Jerusalem, then throughout the region of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God.

And that is why they seized Paul and tried to kill Paul because of the message of Jesus Christ.

But even then Paul has been helped by God.

Boy, have we been helped by God.

And then Paul says that the message he preached, the message he lives for and will die for is from the prophets and Moses, is from the scriptures, our Old Testament, that their message must come to pass and that the Christ must suffer, that he would be the first to rise from the dead and would proclaim light to our people and to the Gentiles.

Arise, shine, for your light has come and the glory of the Lord has risen upon you.

For behold, darkness shall cover the earth and thick darkness the peoples, but the Lord will arise upon you and his glory will be seen upon you.

And nations, not just the one nation of Israel, but nations shall come to your light and kings to the brightness of your rising.

Isn't it amazing that we have these prophecies from hundreds of years before Jesus Christ himself and we can read these things and our minds immediately go to the works of Jesus Christ.

It's just amazing to me.

The scriptures are incredible.

What a gift.

Now we read this passage in Acts and if you're like me, you go like, yeah, Paul, like go get him, like tell him who's boss, tell him about Jesus.

Yeah.

We, we get pretty, I, at least me, I get pretty stoked because I'm like, man, Paul is, he's killing it.

He's crushing it right now.

Like, where's the, where's the organ?

Let's have the altar call, like come on down to the front, but in, we can miss Paul is saying that Paul's mission is the mission of the Messiah, that Paul's accusers not just accuse him, but they are.

They are accusing the Messiah and also oppose their Torah.

They oppose the scriptures.

So let's just not get caught up in the powerful words of Paul, although they are powerful and his, his conversion and praise God for all the things.

But we, we got to think how these Pharisees, how any other Jew or even the Romans would have heard.

Heard and received this message.

It would have been offensive.

It would have been, uh, like bonkers.

I mean, and we've kind of seen that throughout Paul's missionary journeys of how from city to city, there's riots.

There's people who are going crazy that if, if they had cars back then they would have flipped them over.

They would have been staring.

Ah, what do you see here?

Get him out of here.

Get the pitchforks, burn him at the stake.

It would have been ugly, offensive, and that's what we see here.

Let's continue reading verse 24, and as he was saying these things in his defense, Festus said with a loud voice, Paul, are you out of your mind?

Your great learning is driving you out of your mind.

But Paul said, I am not out of my mind, most excellent Festus, but I am speaking true and rational words.

For the king knows about these things, and to him I speak boldly.

For I am persuaded that none of these things has escaped his notice, for this has not been done in a corner.

So at that moment, right?

Festus interrupts Paul, and Festus, who is not educated in Jewish tradition or learnings, but he is a Roman through and through.

And so to a Roman, the thought of Jesus rising from the dead defies all logic and reason.

I mean, not just to a Roman, but in modern day logic and reason, it makes no sense.

And so when he says Paul is out of his mind, he probably means it.

He's like, this dude's crazy, he's talking about this guy who's rising from the dead and is connected with these Jews, their religion, like what is, this dude, he sounds really smart.

He sounds like he knows what he's talking about, but the dude is on loony pills.

To which Paul replies and says, nah, bro, I am good.

I am not out of my mind.

I'm actually speaking the truth and actually quite rationally.

And then he brings King Agrippa into the mix and he goes, the king knows, he has none of this stuff that I've talked about has gone unnoticed.

He knows what I'm talking about.

And now he's going to ask Agrippa a question, verse 27.

King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets?

I know that you believe, and Agrippa said to Paul, in a short time, you would persuade me to be a Christian.

And Paul said, whether short or long, I would to God that not only you, but also all who hear me this day might become such as I am, except for these chains.

Then the king arose and the governor and Bernice and those who were sitting with them.

And when they had withdrawn, they said to one another, this man is doing nothing to deserve death or imprisonment.

And Agrippa said to Festus, this man could have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar.

So Paul is challenging King Agrippa with the realities of Jesus Christ, and Agrippa just kind of dismisses Paul.

Really?

In a short time?

You're going to try to persuade me to be a Christian?

Agrippa is like, come on, dude.

Are you serious right now?

And then Paul says, you whether short or long.

I would to God that not only you, but also all who hear me this day might become such as I am, except for these chains.

Paul doesn't care how long or how short it might take for Agrippa to know Christ.

He just wants him to know Christ.

As Paul will write to the church in Philippi, To live is Christ and to die is gain.

Paul wants nothing more than for anyone and everyone to be like him, to understand the grace of God, to understand the lengths at which God has done to reconcile himself to us, that God would choose anyone to save, that God would reveal himself to us through the gift of his Son.

Paul wants that for anyone and everyone.

I have a question, do you?

Do you have that desire for someone?

I pray that we would.

I pray that our hearts would be turned like Paul's, that we would make any effort to preach Jesus Christ.

The interaction here with Festus and King Agrippa comes to a close, and the fate of Paul is set.

He's going to Rome.

He's going in front of Caesar, but he could have been freed if he didn't appeal to Caesar.

And so we're going to continue Paul's journey in Acts 27 next week, but as we wrap up this week, the obvious point of application is how are our hearts for those who do not know Jesus?

Let me read us again Paul's words to Agrippa, Whether short or long, I would to God that not only you but also all who hear me this day might become such as I am, except for these changes.

Do we feel that way toward anyone?

Do we feel that way for our children who have yet to come to a saving faith in Christ?

Are we fervently in prayer for those in our lives who do not know Christ?

Do we share the gospel with them, but not just the gospel, but our lives with them?

I've got a person in mind, and it's a neighbor of ours, and his wife has actually come to our church a few times, and they just had a baby, and it's been so great.

So many here have, who've met them, you've brought them a meal to their house, and this guy, he's, he's so funny.

And you can, he, but he's just so, I don't know what previous Christians have done to him, what they've said to him, what he's experienced, but he's just so jaded towards the church because of Christians.

Josh and I were talking this morning about a barista at a local coffee shop that he goes to that Josh had the chance to talk with him, and same sort of situation.

He's got some stuff with the Bible, but he also, some Christians have really hurt him.

But man, I pray that we would be people who wouldn't give up on people, whether long or short, however long it takes for us to to show them the love of Christ, to be the love of Christ.

Man, let us not be people who give up on people.

Let us not be people who judge on what we see on the exterior, but let us be willing to listen.

Let us be willing to to be willing to become uncomfortable with maybe the things we don't know, maybe the things that we don't understand that they're wrestling with, and just be there and listen so that we could earn the opportunity to show them who Christ is.

This morning we're going to close with a song of response.

And like, just in all reality, this is going to be something that we're we're becomes a little more regular for us is closing with the song of response because how could we look at the life of Paul and him preaching and declaring the truth of the gospel and not respond in praise and worship knowing that that God not only saved Paul but he saved us?

How could we not respond in thanksgiving to God?

How could we not respond to the hope of the gospel with maybe a person or people or family member in mind who does not know God and go I can do nothing in my power and so I will worship you who is in control?

How could we not respond by this morning seeing in Christ alone my hope is found?

He is my light and my strength and my song.

So we're going to respond through a song of worship and then I'll come up and close this in prayer.

Why don't we stand and let's sing together.
