---
layout: sermon
title: Acts 12
date: "2026-01-18T14:49:25.000Z"
category: sermon
audio_url: "https://anchor.fm/s/f5d78a70/podcast/play/114226050/https%3A%2F%2Fd3ctxlq1ktw2nl.cloudfront.net%2Fstaging%2F2026-0-19%2F416409519-44100-2-f6f045a7a5fb9.m4a"
duration: "36:08"
scripture: Acts 12
series: Acts
pastor: Pastor Nate Ellis
description: In this sermon we cover chapter 12 in the book of Acts. We see continued persecution against the church and we answer the question, how do we view pain and suffering from a Biblical worldview.
guid: a0f4614b-1561-4bfc-ab68-17a0d49695e5
episode_id: 1f1b94e1
transcription_model: whisper-large-v3-turbo
---

<p>In this sermon we cover chapter 12 in the book of Acts. We see continued persecution against the church and we answer the question, how do we view pain and suffering from a Biblical worldview. </p>

## Transcription

And Acts 11 ends in somewhat of a fun fashion of the church in Antioch and Barnabas and Saul are there and there was a prophecy that came about of a famine that was coming over the land.

And so, Barnabas and Saul are on their way to Jerusalem to give the elders relief to disperse amongst the church there in Jerusalem and once we get to chapter 12, it says about that time, so these things are happening simultaneously as Barnabas and Saul are on their way to Jerusalem.

This is what's happening in Jerusalem.

Verse 1, About that time, the king laid violent hands on some who belonged to the church.

He killed James, the brother of John, with the sword, and when he saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to arrest Peter also.

This was during the days of unleavened bread, and when he had seized him, he put him in prison, delivering him over to four squads of soldiers to guard him, intending after the Passover to bring him out to the people.

So, Peter was kept in prison, but earnest prayer for him was made to God by the church.

So, the text tells us here that it's Herod the king, which is true, that was a nickname for this role, but it was actually King Agrippa I, and he was really well liked by the Jews.

Okay?

And here's what he did for the Jews.

He lowered taxes.

He wanted to build a wall around Jerusalem, and his nickname was Orange Man.

Sorry, I just couldn't help myself.

That wasn't his nickname.

But the resemblance is uncanny.

But he had, at any rate, he had James, the brother of John, killed around the Passover, and this is probably like AD 41 for some of you history people, which is probably around like eight years or so after Jesus' ascension.

And, but the text notes here that it pleased the Jews, which gives us a little bit of an insight into King Agrippa.

He was really well liked by the Jews, and he really liked it, and he really liked being liked.

And so, the fact that he saw that it pleased the Jews to kill James, he goes, oh, well, maybe I'll get Peter then.

And so, that's why he arrests Peter, because he wanted to do something nice for the Jews.

And they brought out four groups of four soldiers.

So, we have 16 soldiers who are all going to arrest Peter.

And so, if you could imagine, the other people in the church were freaking out, right?

Like, a bunch of soldiers go get Peter, and you're thinking, like, he's done.

Look what they just did with James.

Like, they're going to kill him.

But how does the church respond?

Earnest prayer, it tells us in verse 5, with earnest prayer.

Which, gets me thinking, like, how are you at praying for the people in your life?

How are you at praying for the people in our church?

You know, how many times, it's so easy for us sometimes to just say we're going to pray for someone, and then not pray at all.

I wonder what would happen in our church.

I wonder what would happen in us if, as needs came about, and as things were being shared, if we just took a moment, hey, let's just pray, right now.

And, like, I wonder what would happen if that was our posture, if that was our response.

And you might be like, well, Nate, I'm just really uncomfortable praying with other people.

Good.

Do it anyways.

Verse 6.

Now, when Herod was about to bring him out on that very night, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and centuries before the door were guarding the prison.

Okay, so, this Herod the king was about to bring him out.

So, what does this tell us?

It's towards the end of the Passover.

And these are the last potential moments of Peter's life.

And what does the text tell us he's doing?

Sleeping.

Which, like, I can't imagine being in this circumstance and sleeping.

Like, if this was me, I'd be thinking, like, what about my wife?

What about my kids?

Like, what are they going to do with the life insurance money?

Like, is Kayla going to get remarried?

Like, I would be, all of these thoughts, all of this anxiety rushing through my head, all these things, and yet not Peter.

He's, like, sleeping.

And not only is he sleeping, but he's sleeping chained to two soldiers.

And then there's two more soldiers outside the door.

So, like, are these guys sleeping?

The text doesn't tell us if he's sleeping.

But, like, just what a scene that Peter is sleeping.

But he trusted the Lord.

He was okay with death.

He was okay with what was coming, what was ahead for him.

And to quote the famous words of Queen Esther, If I perish, I perish.

And what a gift.

What a joy the Christian life is.

That we have hope beyond today.

We have hope beyond this world in front of us.

We have the promise of the empty grave.

We have hope of life everlasting.

And so, if death is upon us, Amen.

We get to see Jesus.

We don't have to be afraid of what is to come after this life.

If our hope, if our faith, if we believe in Jesus Christ.

Verse 7.

And behold, an angel of the Lord stood next to him, and a light shone in the cell.

He struck Peter on the side and woke him, saying, Get up, quickly.

And the chains fell off his hands.

And the angel said to him, Dress yourself and put on your sandals.

And he did so.

And he said to him, Wrap your cloak around you and follow me.

And he went out and followed him.

He did not know that what was being done by the angel was real, but thought he was seeing a vision.

When they had passed the first and second guard, they came to the iron gate leading into the city.

It opened for them on its own accord.

And they went out and went along one street.

And immediately the angel left him.

Okay, so this angel comes into the prison cell, hits Peter, is like, Wake up, dude.

Get dressed.

We're getting out of here.

It's a rescue mission.

And so he gets dressed.

And he thinks he's seeing things.

He's having a vision.

And they pass the guards.

The gate just opens into the city.

And then they go over a street.

And then Peter's like, the angel leaves him.

And he's like, What's happening?

Verse 11.

When Peter came to himself, he said, Now I am sure that the Lord has sent his angel and rescued me from the hand of Herod and from all that the Jewish people were expecting.

So Peter comes to.

He realizes what happens and is just blown away by the protection and the rescuing of the Lord.

And so verse 12.

When he realized this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John, whose other name was Mark, where many people were gathered together and were praying.

And when he knocked on the door of the gateway, a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer.

Recognizing Peter's voice in her joy, she did not open the gate, but ran in and reported that Peter was standing at the gate.

Okay, so now Peter, he's like, Okay, I'm here.

I'm free.

I gotta go somewhere.

And so he goes to this house of Mary, which Mary must have had a big house.

So there's a lot of people and there was an outer gate.

So she must have had a party house.

And there were believers who were there praying, right?

And Peter knocks on the door and this servant girl Rhoda recognizes Peter's voice.

But like, maybe she's so excited and is just like, she's overjoyed.

So she's like, Oh my gosh, Peter!

He's here!

And doesn't unlock the door.

Leaves him standing outside.

Verse 15.

They said to her, You are out of your mind!

But she kept insisting that it was so.

And they kept saying, It is his angel.

But Peter continued knocking.

And when they opened, they saw him and were amazed.

But motioning to them with his hand to be silent, he described to them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison.

And he said, Tell these things to James and to the brothers.

Then he departed and went to another place.

So Rhoda goes to the people and is like, Hey, it's Peter!

He's here!

And they're like, Rhoda, you are out of your mind, girl.

And then finally they listen to her, let him in.

They're ecstatic.

They're going crazy.

It's a party.

And then Peter's like, Hey, shh!

Shh!

Shh!

Kind of a, I'm on the hunt.

Not yet, but I will be on the hunt.

Like, God let me out of prison.

He tells them what happened.

And they're ecstatic.

And, uh, then Peter tells them to go tell these things to James, um, which most Bible scholars believe this is the brother of Jesus.

Um, that James, who we have his writings in our, in our Bible, uh, and, uh, and, uh, and, uh, and, uh, uh, and, uh, and, uh, in the Jerusalem church.

Um, and then Peter leaves this place and after telling him the story and he gets out of town, which Luke doesn't tell us why, but it doesn't take a rocket scientist to understand why Peter got out of Jerusalem as quickly as possible.

And if you needed more reasoning of why, verse 18.

Now when day came, there was, there was no little disturbance among the soldiers over what had become of Peter.

And after Herod searched for him and did not find him, he examined the sentries and ordered that they should be put to death.

Then he went down from Judea to Caesarea and spent time there.

So the king put out a search.

He got all the soldiers on.

He's like, hey, we, where's Peter?

Let's go find Peter.

And it also, the text also tells us that the soldiers were examined, which probably means they were tortured at some, to some degree.

And then since they failed to do their jobs, they were given the sentence that Peter was supposed to be given.

Um, and then, uh, King Agrippa goes down to Caesarea and lives his life there.

Verse 20.

Now Herod was angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon and they came to him with one accord and having persuaded Blastus, the king's chamberlain, they asked for peace because their country depended on the king's country for food.

On an appointed day, Herod put on his royal robes and took his seat upon the throne and delivered an oration to them.

And the people were shouting, the voice of a god and not of a man.

Then immediately an angel of the Lord struck him down because he did not give glory, give God the glory and he was eaten by worms and breathed his last.

Some people say scripture is boring.

I don't see it.

Okay, so this portion here, we, uh, we're getting a bit of history and, uh, Luke's account follows very closely to what Josephus says, says will happen.

And Josephus, uh, a Jewish historian around the time and, um, their accounts line up, uh, and, anyways, there was, we start here in verse 20 and there's some sort of rift between these free providences of Tyre and Sidon and there was a disruption in their food supply chain.

And so they go to the king and, um, they send some leaders to meet with him to strike a deal.

And it seems like the deal, they found agreeing terms, they made a deal and on this appointed day, as it tells us in the text, uh, the deal was to be formalized and Luke says he put on his royal robes and Josephus gives us some, some, uh, fashion details here when he gives us the history and he says he was covered in silver and I'm going to quote now.

This is Josephus.

The silver illumined by the touch of the first rays of the sun was wondrously radiant and by its glitter inspired fear and awe in those who gazed intently upon it.

So it was a really good look.

It was, it was flashy.

It was shiny.

It was, it was, he was styling.

He was balling.

Um, and the people started shouting, the voice of a God not a voice of a man and it ended quite abruptly for this king.

Josephus will describe his death as a condition that we would know now as an appendicitis.

So, uh, the king has an appendicitis and that's how he dies.

Um, but Luke obviously paints him, paints him as the villain and rightfully so.

He was persecuting the church.

He killed his, his friend and imprisoned others and so not a good time for the church here in this moment.

Anyways, verse 24.

But the word of God increased and multiplied and Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem and when they had completed their service bringing with them John whose other's name was Mark.

So, even in the continued persecution, trials, hardship against the church, the word of God increased and multiplied. nothing can stop the word of God from being forwarded, from being proclaimed by Jesus' witnesses.

Christ is building his church and the gates of hell will not stand against it.

When I look at this chapter, I, I see, yeah, we see death, persecution, we see a miraculous saving of, of Peter by an angel and this is not the first time or first occasion in our journey through Acts and it won't be the last where we see persecution, trial, and hardship and as I think about this text and as I think about you know, what do we, what do we do with a text like this?

What I really want to do is kind of take a step back and look at pain and suffering look at hardships and trials not just in the text but how do we how do we have a biblical worldview of pain and suffering?

How do we have a biblical worldview of pain and suffering?

And so that's what we're going to spend the next few moments of our time on is looking at pain and suffering from a biblical worldview and before we even get to the specifics of pain and suffering we need to kind of even take a step back further and since we're looking at it from a biblical perspective we have to ask the question who is the God of the Bible?

Who is the God of the Bible?

And there's many ways we could discuss this and we could spend hours talking about this but what we're going to do in our time this morning is look at two different things look at the communicable and incommunicable attributes of God communicable meaning there are some attributes of God that have that are transferred are shared with us and God right like an easy example are love we understand love we get love but never to the degree or understanding of God that's one of the communicable attributes of God we have an understanding of love but not to the fullness and measure of God but it is one of the attributes that God so graciously has given to us and then there's the incommunicable attributes of God which means these are attributes that we do not understand we do not know we can't even fully grasp right like God is all present we don't get we cannot understand the idea of being everywhere any every place at the same time we just yeah so that's an incommunicable we're going to look at both I'm not going to distinguish between which one's communicable which ones are incommunicable but I think you'll kind of get it so God is is omni right God is omni which means all or unsurpassed so God is omnibenevolent which means God is love I'm going to have scriptures here for each of these and they won't be on the screen and I'm just going to read them out to you if you want the list I can give it to you later omnibenevolent 1 John 4 8 anyone who does not love does not know God because God is love so the scriptures are describing who is who is the God of the Bible God is love is what scriptures tell us God is omnipresent Psalm 39 139 where shall I go from your spirit or where shall I flee from your presence if I ascend to heaven you are there if I make my bed in Sheol or hell you are there if I take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea you are there God is omnipresent he is all present he is always present God is omniscient all intelligent all knowing Psalm 147 verse 5 great is our Lord abundant in power his understanding is beyond measure he is all knowing his understanding is beyond measure God is omnipotent all powerful Jeremiah 32 17 it is you who have made the heavens and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched arm nothing is too hard for you God is all powerful God is omnisapient or all wise Romans 11 33 oh the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God how unsearchable are his ways how inscrutable his ways God is all wise God God is omnificent he's all creating Colossians 1 16 for by him all things were created in heaven and on earth God is omnivoracious God is truth Titus 1 2 in hope of eternal life which God who never lies promised before the ages began God who never lies again we're looking at a biblical world view on pain and suffering and so how should we understand the first question we need to ask is who is God of the Bible and so if and this is not a complete list here of all the characteristics and attributes of God just a laundry list so far but if God is all love all present all intelligent all powerful all wise all creating if God is all truth and I believe in God the next question is what must I concede what must I admit what do I have to admit what do I have to give up okay God that's who that's who the scripture says you are then what must I admit what must I give up what must I believe since I say I believe in you what must I understand about you then if God is all those things and I have to admit that I don't know what God knows Ecclesiastes 9 3 the hearts of the children of man are full of evil and madness is in their hearts while they live and after that they go to the dead we're evil we have madness in our hearts and then we die that's what Ecclesiastes says I'm not as good as God I must also admit that God's plans are not flawed Psalm 18 30 and 31 this God his way is perfect the word of the Lord proves true he is a shield for all those who take refuge in him this God his way is perfect the word of the Lord proves true I must also concede that God's values might not match mine 1 Corinthians 1 25 for the foolishness of God is wiser than man and the weakness of God is stronger than men that's what I must concede if I'm going to worship if I'm going to serve if I'm going to believe in the God of the Bible then what I must admit I don't know what God knows I'm not as good as God God's plans are not flawed and God's values do not match mine so whatever thing is downstream from that pain and suffering any issue or topic that you have or are worried about anything there we must first admit and understand who our God is what that means for me in light of that and so when we look at pain and suffering I don't know what God knows God sees the full picture I'm not as good as God maybe my own values are flawed maybe I'm looking at this from a person a flawed perspective a flawed motive maybe I just don't understand and that's a really hard place to be I don't understand why we're going through this I don't understand why why I feel isolated why I feel hurt it seems like I'm doing all these right things like what is God why and so then how do we respond how do we respond our first response with these concessions with these truths in mind what's my first response faith to believe to trust that God is in control even when I don't understand his ways are not my ways his thoughts are not my thoughts he knows more than me he knows better than me he sees the full picture I only see in part and so I have faith I have faith how else can I respond I can respond oh no what just happened I can respond with hope the hope of the gospel I can look at Jesus the hope that's founded the gospel the hope of eternal life Hebrews describes it this way Hebrews 6 18 and 19 hold fast to the hope set before us we have this as a sure and steadfast anchor of the soul a hope that enters into the inner place behind the curtain hope in this scripture has legs a hope that enters into the inner place behind the curtain hope in this scripture has legs and moves into this inter place behind the curtain of course that's a call back to the temple and into the structure and the holy of holies where the presence of God was and our hope moves into that place our hope is Jesus who did what no man could do who did what the first Adam could not do be perfect obey God's laws not only did he do that but he died and he rose from the grave and that is our hope Jesus is our hope and so I can have a hope that this world as it is is not my full and complete home this world is not our home so I can have hope of the future hope of what Jesus said and what he promised and lastly love I can have faith respond with faith that's trust in God hope belief for eternal life that is to come and love while while you were still sinner Christ died for you scripture tells us in first Peter cast your cares upon him because he cares for you Hebrews will say we have a high priest who sympathizes with us who felt betrayed who felt lonely who felt cast off who was beaten who was mocked who understands what we have gone through and are going through we have a God who loves us and is coming back for us and we are secure in his hand let me remind you of Jesus high priestly prayer in John 17 where Jesus prays to the Father keep them in your name keep them we are secure we are held we are kept in the hand of the Father and so if you are a Christian we view pain and suffering not just by what we see not just by what we know and not just by what we experience we must start with who God is he is the creator of all we must then look and see okay if that's who God is who am I in light of that and let and then let our faith in him guide us let our hope of the future remind us that this is not forever what you are experiencing is not for ever but the love of Jesus which love led him to the cross remind us who he is and what he has done for us I love that we before we sang that last song we got to look at the lyrics and that picture of Jesus because we were able to see him more clearly and I was weeping as I saw this beautifully articulated and truth a bunch of truth claims and scriptures all throughout those lyrics because it was reminding me of who Jesus is and what he did for you and for me and so life is going to suck things are going to be hard things are going to be tough but as a Christian we must remember I don't know what God knows yeah I'm not as good as God God's plans are not flawed and his values might not match mine but I trust him I will serve him I will embrace the suck I will embrace the pain I will embrace the hardship and I will look to be like Jesus who in the midst of betrayal still served the person who was going to betray him in the midst of being on being in the garden of Gethsemane and he's asking his disciples to pray and they just keep falling asleep and then Peter in his boldness goes and swipes this guy's ear off Jesus doesn't look at Peter and go what the heck man what are you doing I can't believe you no he just picks the dude's ear up and heals him how can I in the midst of pain in the midst of suffering in the midst of hardship in the midst of loneliness in the midst of isolation in the midst of things not going right in your marriage in the midst of things just piling up in the midst of you feeling like you suck love like Jesus loved and serve because that's what Jesus did for us would you pray with me we thank you God that you are in control and that we are not we thank you Lord that you are trustworthy because you know all you see all have created all and love all Lord we ask that in the midst of pain and suffering that we would look to you because you are our only hope in life and death you are all that we need Lord help us to see that help us to put our full faith in you our full hope in you and to love like you have loved us thank you Lord for this morning it's in Jesus name everyone said amen amen and amen thank you for joining us this morning
